
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark. ACT I. SCENE I. An open Place before the palace. Enter Bernardo and Francisco, two centinels. BERNARDO. HO's there? Fran. Nay, answer me: itand and unfold your seif. Ber. Long live the King. Fran. Bernardo? Ber. He. Fran. You come molt carefully upon your hour. Ber. 'Tis now afruck twelve, get thee to bed, Francisco. Fran. For this relief, much thanks: 'tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart. Ber. Have you had quiet guard. Fran. Not a mouse stirring. Ber. Well, good-night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The rivals of my watch, bid them make hate. Enter Horatio and Marcellus. Fran. I think I hear them. Stand; who's there? VOL. VI. X x Hor.
Hor. Friends to this ground. Mar. And liege-men to the Dane. Fran. Give you good-night. Mar. Oh farewel, honefl soldier; who hath reliev'd you r Fran. Bernardo has my place: give you good-night. [Exit Francisco. Mar. Holla, Bernardo. Ber. Say, what is Horatio there? Hor. A piece of him. Ber. Welcome Horatio, welcome good Marcellus. Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night ? Ber. I have seen nothing. Mar. Horatio says, 'tis but our phantafie, And will not let belief take hold of him, Touching this dreaded fight, 'twice seen of us; Therefore I have intreated him along With us, to watch the minutes of this night, That if again this apparition come, He may approve our eyes, and speak to it. Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear. Ber. Sit down a while, And let us once again assail your ears, That are so fortified against our ifory, What we have two nights seen. Hor. Well, fit we down, And let us hear Bernardo speak of this. Ber. Last night of all, When yon fame flar, that's wefiward from the pole, Had made his course t'illume that part of heav'n Where now it burns, Marcellus and my self, The bell then beating one----- Mar. Peace, break thee off; Enter
Enter the Ghofi. Look where it comes again. Ber. In the fame figure, like the King that's dead. Mar. Thou art a scholar, speak to it, Horatio. Ber. Looks it not like the King ? mark it, Horatio. Hor. Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder. Ber. It would be spoke to. Mar. Speak to it, Horatio. Hor. What art thou that ufurp'ft this time of night, Together wi-th that fair and warlike form, In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometime march ? by Heav'n I charge thee speak. Mar. It is offended. Ber. See! it ifalks away. Hor. Stay; speak; I charge thee, speak. [Ex. Ghofl. Mar. 'Tis gone, and will not answer. Ber. How now, Horatio ? you tremble and look pale. Is not this something more than phantafie? What think you of it ? Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe, Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes. Mar. Is it not like the King? Hor. As thou art to thy fells Such was the very armour he had on, When he th' ambitious Norway combated: So frown'd he once, when in an angry parle, He smote the fleaded a Polack on the ice. 'Tis strange----- Mer. Thus twice before, and juft" at this b dead hour, With martial fialk, hath he gone by our watch. * Pole-axe in the common editions; he/ peaks of a prikce of Pilarid whonmhe flewl irt battle. He uses the word Polack again, act. 2. /cene 4. b ame. Xx z Hor.
Hoir. In what particular thought to work, I know not: But in the gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some ifrange eruption to our Rfate. Mar. Good now fit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this fame strict and mofi obfervanr watch So nightly toils the subjects of the land? And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war ? Why such impress of hipwrights, whose fore task Does not divide the funday from the week ? What might be toward, that this sweaty hafre Doth make the night joint labourer with the day: Who is't that can inform me ? H-or. That can I, At least the whisper goes Co. Our lafi King, Whose image even but now appear'd to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, (Thereto prickt on by a most emulate pride) Dar'd to the fight. In which, our valiant Hamlet, (For so this fide of our known world efteem'd him) Did flay this Fortinbras: who by feal'd compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit (with his life) all those his lands Which he flood feiz'd of to the Conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our King; which had return To the inheritance of fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher, as by that cov'nant And carriage of the articles defign'd, His fell to Hamlet. Now young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there, Shark'd up a lift of landless refolutes, For
For food and dyet, to some enterprize That hath a fiomach in't: which is no other, And it doth well appear unto our slate, But to recover of us by firong hand And terms compulfative, those foresaid lands So by his father loft: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land. Ber. I think it be no other, but even so: Well may it fort that this portentous figure Comes armed through our watch so like the.King, That was and is the question of these wars. Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye. In the most high and t palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiefl Julius fell, The graves flood tenantless, the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman itreets, Stars fhon with trains of fire, dews of blood fell, Disasters veil'd the fun, and the moist flar Upon whole influence Neptune's empire fiands, Was sick almofi to doom's-day with eclipse. And even the like precurfe of fierce events, As harbingers preceding fiill the fates, And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heav'n and earth together demonlfrated Unto our climatures and country-men. Enter Ghost again. But sos, behold! lo, where it comes again! I'll cross it, though it blai me. Stay, illusion! [Spreading his arms. If t palmy for vi&orious; in the other editions flouriflhing.
If thou hafl any found, or use of voice, Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do ease, and grace to me; Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy country's fate, Which happily foreknowing may avoid, Oh speak!------ Or, if thou hafl uphoorded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, [Cock For which, they fay, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay, and speak ------ Stop it, Marcel/us ----- Mar. Shall I strike it with my partizan ? Hor. Do, if it will not feand. Ber. 'Tis here ------ FHor. 'Tis here ------ Mer. 'Tis gone. [Exit We do it wrong, being so majeffical, To offer it the ihew of violence; For it is as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows, malicious mockery. Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew. Hor. And then it ifarted like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard, The cock that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and ftrili-founding throat Awake the God of day; and at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, Th' extravagant and erring spirit hyes To his confine. And of the truth herein, This presfent object made probation. Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some fay, that ever 'gainft that season comes Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated, crows. Ghoji. The
The bird of dawning fingeth all nlight lotig: And then, they fay, no spirit walks abroad, The nights are wholfome, then no planets stRike, No Fairy takes, no witch hath power to chartii; So hallow'd and so gracious is the time. Hor. So have I heard, and do in part believe it. But look, the morn in ruffec mantle clad, Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill; Break we our watch up, and by my advice Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young Hamlet. For upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him: Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty? Mar. Let's do't, I pray, and I this morning know Where we shall find him most conveniently. SCENE Ep II. The Palace. Enter Claudius King of Denmark, Gertrude the 9ieen, Hamlet, Polonius, Laertes, Voltimand, Cornelius, lords and attendants. King. ' HOU G H yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death 1. The memory be green; and that it fittied To bear our hearts in grief, a'd oi~ whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe; Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature, That we with wisest sorrow think on hirm, Together with remembrance of our selves. Therefore our sometime sifter, now our"Queni, Th' imperial jointress of this warlike slate, Have we, as 'twere, with a defeated joy, _ __ __ _~
With one auspicious, and one dropping eye, With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole, Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barr'd Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along, (for all, our thanks.) Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth; Or thinking by our late dear brother's death Our slate to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with this dream of his advantage; He hath not fail'd to pelter us with message, Importing the surrender of.thofe lands Loft by his father, by all bands of law To our most valiant brother. So much for him. Now for our self, and for this time of meeting: Thus much the bufiners is. We have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras, Who impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress His further gate herein. In that the levies, The lifts, and full proportions are all made Out of his fubje6ts; and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you [oaltamand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power Of treaty with the King, more than the scope Which thefre dilated articles allow. Farewel, and let your hafe commend your duty. Vol. In that, and all things, will we shew our duty. King. We doubt in nothing, heartily farewel. [Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius. And now Laertes, what's the news with you? You
You told us of some suit. What is't, Laertes? You cannot (peak of reason to the Dane, And lose your voice. What would'ft thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer, not thy asking The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more instrumental to the mouth, Than is the Throne of Denmark to thy father. What wouldt thou have, Laertes? Laer. My dread lord, Your leave and favour to return to France; From whence, though willingly I came to Denmark To ihew my duty in your coronation; Yet now I muRf confess, that duty done, My thoughts and wishes bend again tow'rd France: And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon. King. Have you your father's leave? what says Polonius? Pol. He hath, my lord, by labourfome petition, Wrung from me my flow leave; and at the last Upon his will I feal'i my hard consent. I do beseech you give him leave to go. King. Take thy fair hour, Laertes, time be thine, And thy befl graces; spend it at thy will. But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son ---- Ham. A little more than kin, and less than kind. King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you ? Ham. Not so my lord, I am too much i'th' fun. Queen. Good Hamlet cast thy b nighted colour off, And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. Do not, for ever, with thy veiled lids, Seek for thy noble father in the dulRi Thou know'ft 'tis common, all that live mull die, Passing through nature to eternity. Ham. Ay, madam, it is common. V o L. VI. Y y yueen. b nightly.
>uyeen. If it be, Why seems it so particular with thee ? Ham. Seems, madam ? nay, it is; I know not seems: 'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor cuflomary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejeted 'haviour of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, thews of grief, That can denote me truly. There may seem, For they are actions that a man might play; But I have that within, which paffeth (how: These,. but the trappings, and the suits of woe. King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, To give there mourning duties to your father : But you must know, your father loft a father, That father his, and the surviver bound In filial obligation, for some term To do obsequious sorrow. But to perfevere' In obstinate condolement, is a course Of impious ftubbornefs, unmanly grief It (hews a will moRs incorrec to heav'n, A heart unfortify'd, a mind impatient, An underfLanding simple, and unfchool'd: For what we know must be, and is as common As any the must vulgar thing to sense, Why should we, in our peevish opposition, Take it to heart ? fie ? 'tis a fault to heav'n, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd, whose common theam Is death of fathers, and who fiill hath cry'd, From the first coarse, 'till he that died to-day, " This must be fo." We pray you throw to earth This
This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne, And with no less nobility of love, Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart tow'rd you. For your intent In going back to school to Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire: And we beseech you, bend you to remain Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye, Our chiefeft courtier, cousin, and our son. OQueen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet: I pr'ythee flay with us, go not to Wittenberg. Ham. I (hall in all my best obey you, madam. King. Why 'tis a loving, and a fair reply, Be as our self in Denmark. Madam, come, This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof No jocund healk that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell; And the King's rowfe the heav'n (hall bruit again Re-fpeaking earthly thunder. Come away. [Exeunt. SCENE III. Manet Hamlet. Ham. Oh that this too-too solid flesh would melt, Thaw, and resolve it self into a dew; Or that the Everlasting had not fixt His cannon 'gainft felf-flaughter. Oh God! oh God! How weary, flale, flat, and unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world ? Fie on't! oh fie! 'tis an unweeded garden Yy z That
That grows to feed; things rank, and gross in nature Possess it meerly that it should come thus. But two months dead! nay, not so much; not two, ---- So excellent a King, that was, to this, Hyper;ion to a satyr: so loving to my mother, That he permitted not the winds of heav'n Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth! Mull I remember ? ----- why, the would hang on him, As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on; yet within a month?---- Let me not think----- Frailty, thy name is woman! A little month! .----or e'er those (hooes were old With which the follow'd my poor father's body, Like Niobe, all tears --- Why (he, ev'n she, ----- Oh heav'n! a beast that wants discourse of reason Would have mourn'd longer ----- married with mine uncle, My father's brother; no more like my father, Than I to Hercules. Within a month! ----- Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her gauled eyes, She married. Oh most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to inceffuous sheets: It is not, nor it cannot come to good. But break, my heart, for I mull hold my tongue. SCENE IV. Enter Horatio, Bernardo, and Marcellus. HIor. Hail to your lordship. Ham. I am glad to fee you well, Horatio ? or I do forget my self ? Hor. The fame, my lord, and your poor servant ever. Ham. Sir, my good friend, I'll change that name with you: And
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio ? Marcellus / ----- Mar. My good lord-- Ham. I am very glad to fee you; good even, Sir. But what, in faith, make you from WIittenberg? Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord. Ham. I would not ' hear your enemy fay so; Nor shall you do mine ear that violence, To make it truRer of your own report Against your self. I know you are no truant; But what is your affair in Elfinoor ? We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart. Hor. My lord, I came to fee your father's funeral. Ham. I pr'ythee do not mock me, fellow-fhudent; I think it was to fee my mother's wedding. Hor. Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon. Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio: the funeral bak'd meats Did coldly firnifh forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heav'n, Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio. My father-----methinks I fee my father. Hor. Oh where, my lord? Ham. In my mind's eye, Horatio. Hor. I saw him once, he was a goodly King. Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon his like again. Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yefternight. HJam. Saw! who?--- Hor. My lord, the King your father. Ham. The King my father! Hor. Season your admiration for a while With an attentive ear; 'till I deliver Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you. Ham. ' have
Ham. For heaven's love, let me hear. Hor. Two-nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch, In the dead waRe and middle of the night, Been thus encountred. A figure like your father, Arm'd at all points exatly, Cap-a-pe, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes flow and stately by them; thrice he walk'd, By their opprefl and fear-furprized eyes, Within his truncheon's length; whilst they (diftill'd Almost to jelly with the a& of fear) Stand dumb, and speak not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did, And I with them the third night kept the watch, Where as they had deliver'd both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The apparition comes. I knew your father: These hands are not more like. Ham. But where was this ? Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watcht. Ham. Did you not speak to it ? Hor. My lord, I did; But answer made it none; yet once methought It lifted up its head, and did address It self to motion, like as it would speak: But even then the morning cock crew loud; And at the found it shrunk in haste away, And vanifht from our fight. Ham. 'Tis very itrange. Hor. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true; And we did think it writ down in our duty To let you know of it. Ham. Indeed, Sirs, but this troubles me. . \ Hold
Hold you the watch to-night? Both. We do, my lord. Ham. Arm'd, fay you? Both. Arm'd, my lord. Ham. From top to toe? Both. My lord, from head to foot. Ham. Then saw you not his face ? Hor. Oh yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up. Ham. What, look'd he frowningly ? Hor. A count'nance more in sorrow than in anger. Ham. Pale, or red ? Hor. Nay, very pale. Ham. And fixt his eyes upon you Hor. Moit conifantly. Ham. I would I had been there. Hor. It would have much amaz'd you. Ham. Very like; itaid it long? Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred. A/i. Longer, longer. Hor. Not when I faw't. Ham. His beard was grisly ? Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life, A fable-filver'd. Ham. I'll watch to-night; perchance 'twill walk again. Hor. I warrant you it will, Ham. If it assume my noble father's person, I'll speak to it, tho' hell it felffhould gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If you have hitherto conceal'd this fight , Let it be d treble in your silence still : And whatsoever (hall befall to-night, Give it an understanding, but no tongue I will requite your loves: so, fare ye well. Upon d tenable.
Upon the platform 'twixt eleven and twelve '11 visit you. All. Our duty to your honour. Ham. Your love, as mine to you : farewel. My father's spirit in arms ? all is not well; I doubt some foul play: would the night were come; 'Till then fit fiill, my foul : foul deeds will rife, (Tho' all the earth o'erwhelm them) to mens eyes. SCENE V. An Apartment in Polonius's house. Enter Laertes and Ophelia. Laer. Y necessaries are imbark'd, farewel ; And sifter, as the winds give benefit, And convoy is afliftant ; do not sleep, But let me hear from you. Oph. Do you doubt that Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favours, Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not permanent, tho' sweet, not lasting, *The perfume, and suppliance of a minute ; No more. Oph. No more but so ? Laer. Think it no more: For nature crescent does not grow alone, In t thews and bulk ; but as his temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and foul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves yowunow, And now nof foil nor cautel doth befmerch The virtue of his g will: but you must fear * TZhe suppliance of a minute. His f foil. ' fear. [Exeunt. [Exit. __ __ __ "f thews, or ~ualities.
His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own: For he himself is fubjet to his birth; He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The san&ity and health of the whole state. And therefore must his choice be circumfcrib'd Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he's head. Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it, As he in his peculiar h a& and place May give his saying deed; which is no further, Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honour may fultain, If with too credent ear you lift his songs, Or lose your heart; or your charte treasure open To his unmafter'd importunity. Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear fifler, And keep within the rear of your affe&ion, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The charieft maid is prodigal enough, If mhe unmask her beauty to the moon: Virtue it felif fcapes not calumnious firokes, The canker galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be difclos'd; And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blaftments are most imminent. Be wary then, best safety lies in fear; Youth to it self rebels, though none else near. Oph. I shall th' effe&s of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But good my brother, Do not, as rome ungracious pastors do, Shew me the steep and thorny way to heav'n; \Whilst like a puft and careless libertine, V o L. VI. Zz Him- b feil and force.
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, f- And recks not his own reed. Laer. Oh, fear me not. S C E N E VI. Enter Polonius. I stay too long; --but here my father comes: A double blessing is a double grace; Occasion smiles upon a second leave. Pol. Yet here, Laertes./ get aboard for flhame, The wind fits in the shoulder of your fail, And you are (laid for there. My blessing with you; And these few precepts in thy memory See thou character. ' Give thy thoughts no tongue, ' Nor any unproportion'd thought his aet: ' Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar; ' The friends thou hari, and their adoption try'd, ' Grapple them to thy foul with hooks of steel: ' But do not dull thy palm with entertainment ' Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware ' Of Entrance to a quarrel: but being in, ' Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee. ' Give ev'ry man thine ear; but few thy voice. * Take each man's censure; but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not expreft in fancy; rich, not gaudy: For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the bel rank and flation Are most select and generous, chief in that. Neither a borrower, nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both it self and friend: A borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This t recks not his own reed, that is, heeds not his own lessons.
This above all ; to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. Farewel; my bleding season this in theet Laer. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord. Pol. The time invites you, go, your servants tend. Laer. Farewel Ophelia, and remember well What I have said. Oph. 'Tis in my mem'ry lockt, And you your self shall keep the key of it. Laer. Farewel. [Exit Laer. Pol. What is't, Ophelia, he laid to you ? Oph. So please you, fomeching touching the lord Hamlet Pol. Marry, well bethought! 'Tis told me he hath very oft of late Given private time to you; and you your self Have of your audience been most free and bounteous. If it be so, as so 'tis put on me, And that in way of caution, I must tell you, You do not understand your self so clearly, As it behoves my daughter, and your honour. What is between you? give me up the truth. Oph. He hath, my lord, of late, made many tenders Of his affe&tion to me. Pol. Affeaion! puh! you [peak like a green girl, Unfifted in such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call them ? Oph. I do not know, my lord, what I should think. Pol. Marry I'll teach you; think your self a baby, That you have ta'en his tenders for true pay, Which are not Gferling. Tender your self more dearly; Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,) Wronging it thus, you'll tender me a fool. Zz z O8f0
Oph. My lord, he hath importun'd me with love, In honourable fashion. Pol. Ay, fashion you may call't: go to, go to. Oph. And hath giv'n count'nance to his speech, my lord, With almost all the holy vows of heaven. Pol. Ay, fpringes to catch woodcocks. I do know When the blood burns, how prodigal the foul Lends the tongue vows. There blazes, oh my daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both, Ev'n in their promise as it is a making, You muff not take for fire. From this time, Be somewhat fcanter of your maiden presence, Set your intreatments at a highter rate, Than a command to parley. For lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young; And with a larger t tether may he walk, Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers, 'Not of that die which their inveffments shew, But meer implorers of unholy suits, Breathing like fanaified and pious bonds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would nor, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment's leisure, As to give words or talk with the lord Hamlet. Look to't, I charge you; come your way. Oph. I (hall obey, my lord. [Exeunt. -f- Tider, or tether, tcder, a firing to tye horses. i Not of the eye which their invejiments shew. SCENE
SCENE VII. The Platform before the palace. Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus. Ham. T H E Air bites shrewdly; it is very cold. I-. Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air. Ham. What hour now? Hor. I think it lacks of twelve. Mar. No, it is struck. Hor. I heard it not: it then draws near the season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk. [Noi'e of warlike mufick within. What does this mean, my lord ? Ham. The King doth wake to-night, and takes his rowfe, Keeps waffel, and the fwagg'ring upitart reels; And as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge. Hor. Is it a cuifom? Ham. Ay marry is' : But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honour'd in the breach, than the observance. * Enter * These z2I lines following are in the firfl edition, but since left out, perhaps as being thought too verbose. This heavy-headed revell, east and weft; Makes us traduc'd, and tax'd of other nations, They clip us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition ; and indeed it takes From our atchievements, though perform'd at height, "T he pith and marrow of our attribute. So oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
Enter Ghost. Hor. Look, my lord, it comes! Ham. Angels and miniflers of grace defend us! Be thou a fpiric of health, or goblin damn'd, Bring with thee airs from heav'n, or blasts from hell, Be thy k intents wicked or charitable, Thou com'af in such a quefionable shape, That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet, King, Father, Royal Dane: oh! answer me, Let me not burfl in ignorance; but tell Why thy canoniz'd bones hearfed in death, Have burst their cearments ? why the sepulcher, Wherein we saw thee quietly in-urn'd, Hath ope'd his ponderous and marble jaws, To call thee up again ? What may this mean ? That thou dead coarse again in compleat steel Revifit'ft thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous ? and we fools of nature, So horridly to (hake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our fouls. Say, why is this ? wherefore ? what should we do ? [Ghost becko, Hor. It beckons you to go away with it, As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot chufe his origin) By the o ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason Or by some habit, that too much o'er-leavens The form of plausive manners; that there men Carrying, I fay, the stamp of one defer, (Being nature's livery, or fortune's flar), His virtues elie, be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo, Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault. --- Enter Ghost. &c. k evesrts ns Hamlet. As
As if it some impartment did desire To you alone. Mar. Look with what courteous a&ion It waves you to a more removed ground: But do not go with it. F/or. No, by no means. [boldn#g Hamlet. Ham. It will not speak; then I will follow it. Hor. Do not, my lord. Ham. Why, what should be the fear ? I do not set my life at a pin's fee; And for my foul, what can it do to that ? Being a thing immortal as it self. It waves me forth again. ----I '11 follow it ----- Hor. What if it tempt you tow'rd the flood, my lord ? Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff, That beetles o'er his base into the sea; And there aflume some other horrible form, Which might deprive your fov'reignty of reason, And draw you into madness ? think of it. * The very place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into ev'ry brain, That looks so many fadoms to the fta; And hears it roar beneath. Ham. It waves me still: go on, I'll follow thee----- Mar. You shall not go, my lord. Ham. Hold off your hand. Hor. Be rul'd, you thall not go. Ham. My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve: Still am I call'd ? unhand me, gentlemen ---gs [ Breaking from them. By heav'n I'll make a ghofl of him that lets me----- I * Tbe 4 following lines added from the firfi edition. 6
I fay away-----go on--- I'll follow thee ---- [Ex. Ghofl and -Pam. Hor. He waxes defp'rate with imagination. Mar. Let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him. Hor. Have after. To what ifiTue will this come ? Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark. Hor. Heav'n will diret it. Mar. Nay, let's follow him. [Exeunt. S CE N E VIII. Re-Enter Ghofl and Hamlet. Ham. Where wilt thou lead me : speak; I'll go no further. Ghofl. Mark me. Ham. I will. Ghost. My hour is almost come, When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames Must render up my self. Ham. Alas poor Ghost! Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I shall unfold. Ham. Speak, I am bound to hear. Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou (halt hear. Ham. What? Ghost. I am thy Father's spirit; Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day, confin'd to fa~i in fires; 'Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purg'd away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prifon-houfe, I could a tale unfold, whole lightefl word Would harrow up thy foul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes like ifars start from their spheres, Thy knotty and combined locks to part, And
And each particular hair to tfand on end Like quills upon the fretful porcupine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood; lift, lift, oh lif:! If thou didft ever thy dear father love----- Ham. Oh heav'n! GhofJ. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther. Ham. Murther ? Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is; But this most foul, strange, and unnatural. Ham. Haste me to know, that I with wings as swift As meditation or the thoughts of love, May sweep to my revenge. Ghost. I find thee apt; And duller fhouldf thou be than the fat weed That rots it self in ease on Lethe's wharf, Wouldst thou not tir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear: 'Tis given out, that sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me. The whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of my death Rankly abus'd: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sing thy father's life Now wears his crown. Ham. Oh my prophetick foul! my uncle ? Ghofl. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beat, With witchcraft of his wit, with trait'rous gifts, (Oh wicked wit, and gifts that have the power So to seduce!) won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming virtuous Queen. Oh Hamlet, what a falling off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity, That it went hand in hand ev'n with the vow I made to her in marriage; and to decline V oL. VI. Aaa Upon
Upon a wretch, whose nat'ral gifts were poor To those of mine! But virtue, as it never will be movnd, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heavpn; So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd, Will fate it seif in a celestial bed, And prey on garbage---- But soft, methinks I scent the morning air---- Brief let me be ; Sleeping within mine orchard, My custom always in the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole With juice ofcurfed hebeaon in a viop, And in the porches of mine ears did pour The leperous difilment; whose effec Holds such an enmity with blood of man, That swift as quick-silver it courfs through The nat'ral gates and allies of the body; And with a sudden vigour it doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholfome blood: so did it mine, And a mos instant tetter1 bark'd about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome cruff All my smooth body. Thus was I sleeping, by a brother's hand, Of life, of crown, of Queen at once difpatcht; Cut off even in the blossoms of my fin, f Unhouzzled, f unaanointed, J unanePd; No reck'ning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfecions on my head. Oh horrible! oh horrible! moss horrible! If thou haft nature in thee, bear it not; -- unhouzzled, without the sacrament being taken. -t unanointed, 'without extream unflion. - unanel'd, no knell rung. 1 bak'd. Let
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damtaed incet. But howsoever thou purfu'ft this a&t, Taint not thy mind, ilor let thy tfoul contrive Againfi thy mother ought; leave her to hbav't, And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at otnee! The glow-worm (hews the matin to be near, And 'gins to pale his uneffe&tual fire. Adieu, adieu, adieu; remember me. Ham. Oh all you holt of heav'n! oh eartfh! And shall I couple hell? oh hold my heart--. And you my sinews, grow not instant old; But bear me fltiffly up; remember thee----- Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a feat In this diftra<ted globe; remember thee----- Yea, from the table of my memory I'll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures pas, That youth and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone (hall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmixt with baser matter. Yes, by heav'n: Oh moPft pernicious woman! Oh villain, villain, smiling damned villain ! My tables, ---- meet it is I set it down, That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain; At least I'm Cure it may be Co in Denmark. So uncle, there you are ; now to my word; It is; Adieu, adieu, remember me: I've sworn it -- [Eit. hat eldfe? [Wrtitng. SCENE A a a a
SCENE IX. Enter Horatio and Marcellus. Hor. My lord, my lord. Mar. Lord Hamlet. Hor. Heav'n secure him. Mar. So be it. Ior. Illo, ho, ho, my lord. Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy; come boy, come. Mar. How is't, my noble lord ? Hor. What news, my lord? Ham. Oh wonderful! Hor. Good my lord, tell it. Ham. No, you'll reveal it. Hor. Not I, my lord, by heav'n. Mar. Nor I, my lord. Ham. How fay you then, would heart of man once think it ? But you'll be secret ? ----- Both. Ay, by heav'n, my lord. Ham. There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark, But he is an arrant knave. Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave To tell us this. Ham. Why right, you are i' th' right; And so without more circumfkance at all, I hold it fit that we ihake hands, and part; You as your business and desires shall point you, (For every man has business and desire, Such as it is) and for my own poor part, I will go pray. Hor. These are but wild and hurling words, my lord. Ham. I'm sorry they offend you, heartily; Yes heartily. Hor.
Hor. There's no offence, my lord. Ham. Yes, by Sc. Patrick, but there is, my-lord, And much offence too. Touching this vision here--- It is an honedf ghost, that let m'e tell you: For your desire to know what-is between us, O'er-mafter't as you may. And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers, Give me one poor request. Hor. What is'r, my lord ? Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night. Both. My lord, we will not. Ham. Nay, but fwear't. Hor. In faith, my lord, not I. Mar. Nor I, my lord, in faith. Ham. Upon my sword. Mar. We've sworn, my lord, already. Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed. GhofJ. Swear. [Ghost cries under the stage. Ham. Ah ha boy, fay'fi thou so; art thou there truepenny ? Come on, you hear this fellow in the celleridge. Consent to swear. Hor. Propose the oath, my lord. Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen, Swear by my sword. Ghost. Swear. Ham. Hic & ubique? then we'll lhift our ground. Come hither gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword. Never to speak of this which you have heard, Swear by my sword. Ghost. Swear. Ham. Well said, old mole, can'ft work i'th' ground so fafi? A worthy pioneer! Once more remove, good friends. Hor,
Hor. Oh day and night! but this is wondrous strange. Ham. And therefore as a Aranger give it welcome. There are more things in heav'n and earth, Horatto, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come, Here as before, never so help you mercy, (How strange or odd foe'er I bear my fel, As I perchance hereafter flhall think meet To put an antick disposition on) That you at such time feeing me, never shall With arms encumbred thus, or this head (hake; Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase; As well-- we know ----or, we could, and if we would-- Or, if we lift to speak ---- or, there be and if there might--. Or such ambiguous giving out to note, That you know ought of me; this do ye swear. So grace and mercy at your most need help you. Swear. Ghost. Swear. Ham. Refti, reft, perturbed spirit. So, gentlemen, With all my love I do commend me to you; And what so poor a man as Hamlet is, May do t' express his love and friending to you, God willing, (hall not lack; let us go in together, And fiill your fingers on your lips I pray. The time is out of joint; oh cursed fpight, That ever I was born to set it right. Nay, come, let's go together. [Exeunt. ACT
ACT IL SCENE I. An Apartment in Polonius's house. Enter Polonius, and Reyaoido. POLONLUS, I IV E him this mony, and ahere notes, Reyno/dh. SRey. I will, my lord. H ^Pol. Y0ou hlalU do marvellous wifely, good Reynoldo,. Before you vift him, to make iniy^ Of his behaviour. Rey. My lord, I did intend it. Pol. Marry, well said, very well Caid. Look you, Sir, Enquire me first what Danskers are in Parts; And how, and who, what means, and where they keep, What company, at what expence? and finding By this encompassment and drift of quefion, That they do know my fobn; come you more near5 Then your particular demands will touch it, Take you, as 'twere some distant knowledge of him, As thus -- I know his father and his friends, And in part him -- Do you mark this, Reynold ao? Rey. Ay, very well, my lord. Pol. And in part him-- but you may fay---not well But if't be he I mean, he's very wild; Addited so and so .-- and there put on him What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank, As may dishonour him; take heed of that But
But, Sir, such wanton, wild, and usual flips, As are companions noted and most known To youth and liberty. Rey. As gaming, my lord---- Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, Quarrelling, drabbing ---- You may go so far. Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him. Pol. Faith no, as you may season it in the charge; You must not put another scandal on him, That he is open to incontinency, That's not my meaning; but breathe his faults so quaintly, That they may seem the taints of liberty, The flash and out-break of a fiery mind, A savageness in unreclaimed blood Of general assault. Rey. But, my good lord---- Pol. Wherefore should you do this ? Rey. Ay, my lord, I would know that. Pol. Marry, Sir, here's my drift, And I believe it is a fetch of wit. You laying these flight rallies on my son, As 'twere a thing a little foil'd i'th' working, Mark you your party in converse; him you would found, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes, The youth you fpeaklof guilty, be affur'd He closes with you in this consequence; Good Sir, or so, or friend, or gentleman, (According to the phrase or the addition, Of man and country.) Rey. Very good, my lord. Pol. And then, Sir, does he this? He do's---- what was I about to fay ? I was about to fay a something? where did I leave?--- Rey. a nothing.
Rey. At closes in the consequence. Pol. At closes in the confequence---Ay marry, He closes thus. I know the gentleman, I saw him yesterday, or t'other day, Or then, with such and such, and as you fay, There was he gaming, there o'ertook in's rowfe, There falling out at tennis; or perchance, I saw him enter such a house of sale, Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth---- See you now; Your bait of falfhood takes this carp of truth; And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlaces, and with affays of byas, By indiretions find diretions out: So by my former leature and advice Shall you my Ton , you have me, have you not? Rey. My lord, I have. Pol. God b'w' you; fare you well. Rey. Good my lord ---- Pol. Observe his inclination in your self. Rey. I shall, my lord. Pol. And let him ply his mufick. Rey. Well, my lord. fExit. SCENE IL. Enter Ophelia. Pol. Farewel. How now Ophelia, what's the matter? Oph. Alas my lord, I have been so affrighted! Pol With what, in the name of heav'n ? Oph. My lord, as I was sowing in my closet, Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrae'd, No hat upon his head, his itockings fouPl'd, Ungarter'd, and down-gyved to his ancle, V o L. VI. Bbb Pale
Pale as his thirt, his knees knocking each other, And with a look so piteous in purport, As if he had been loosed out of hell, To speak of horrors; thus he comes before me. Pol. Mad for thy love ? Oph. My lord, I do not know: But truly I do fear it. Pol. What said he? Oph. He took me by the wrist, and held me hard, Then goes he to the length of all his arm; And with his other hand, thus o'er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face, As he would draw it, Long time ifaid he so; At last, a little h(aking of my arm, And thrice his head thus waving up and down, He rais'd a sigh, so piteous and profound, That it did seem to (hatter all his bulk, And end his being. Then he lets me go, And with his head over his shoulder turn'd, He feem'd to find his way without his eyes, For out-a-doors he went without their help, And to the laif, bended their light on me. Pol. Come, go with me, I will go Leek the King. This is the very ecfiafie of love, Whose violent property foredoes it self, And leads the will to defp'rate undertakings, As oft as any pafflion under heav'n, That do's afflict our natures. I am sorry; What, have you giv'n him any hard words of late? Oph. No, my good lord; but as you did command, I did repel his letters, and deny'd His access to me. Pol. That hath made him mad. I'm
I'm sorry that with betterb heed and judgment I had not quoted him. Ifear'd he trifl'd And meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jeaioufie; It seems it is as proper to our age, To cast beyond our selves in our opinions, As it is common for the younger fort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King. This muat be known, which being kept close, might move More grief to hide, than hate to utter love. Exvexart. SC E N E III. The Palace. Enter King, .~ueen, Rofincroffe, Guildenftern, lords and other attendants. King. E LCO ME dear Rofincrofe and Guildenfjern, SMoreover, that we much did long to fee you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet's transformation; so I call it, Since not th' exterior, nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it (hould be More than his father's death, that thus hath put him So much from th' underRfanding of himself, I cannot dream of. I entreat you both, That being of so young days brought up with him, And since so neighbour'd to his youth and humour, That you vouchsafe your reft here in our court Some little time, so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather So much as from occasions you may glean, If ought, to us unkown, afflicts him thus, Bbb z Thfat / speed.
That open'd lies within our remedy. ,Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you, And fare I am, two men there are not living, To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To thew us so much gentry and good will, As to extend your time with us a while, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a King's remembrance. Rof. Both your Majesties Might by the sovereign power you have of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty. Guil. But we both obey, And here give up our selves in the full bent, To lay our service freely at your feet. King. Thanks, Roincrojffe and gentle Guildenftern. Queen. Thanks, Guildenflern and gentle Rofincrofe; And I beseech you instantly to visit My too-much changed son. Go some of ye, And bring there gentlemen where Hamlet is. Guil. Heav'ns make o'ur prekence and our pra6tices Pleasant and helpful to him! [Exeunt Rof and Guil Queen. Amen. Enter Polonius. Pol. Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully return'd. King. Thou flill haft been the father of good news. Pol. Have I, my lord ? assure you, my good liege, I hold my duty, as I hold my foul, Both to my God, and to my gracious King,; And I do think (or else this brain of mine Hunts
Hunts not the trail of policy, so sure As I have us'd to do) that I have found The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy. King. Oh speak of that, that I do long to hear. Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors. My news shall be the fruit to that great feafi. King. Thy self do grace to them, and bring them in. [Ex. PoL. He tells me, my sweet Queen, that he hath found The head and fcource of all your ion's diflemper. .>ueen. I doubt it is no other but the main, His father's death, and our o'er-hafty marriage. SCENE IV. Enter Polonius, Volcimand, and Cornelius. King. Well, we shall lift him. Welcome, my good friends! Say Yoltimand, what from our brother Norway ? Volt. Most fair return of greetings, and desires. Upon our first, he sent out to suppress His nephew's levies, which to him appear'd To be a preparation 'gainfi the Polack: But better lookt into, he truly found It was against your highness. Whereat griev'd, That so his sickness, age, and impotence Was falilyv born in hand, sends out arrests On Forti,'ras; which he, in brief, obeys, Receives rebuke from Norway; and in fine, Makes v,~w before his uncle, never more To give :&h' assay of arms against your Majesty. Whcreon~ old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him tiree thousand crowns in annual fee,. And hei commission to employ those soldiers, So levicd as before, against the Polack: With
With an entreaty herein further shewn, That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprize On such regards of safety and allowance, As therein are tft down. King. It likes us well s And at our more confider'd time we'll read, Answer, and think upon this business. Mean time we thank you, for your well-took labour. Go to your reft, at night we'll feast together. Most welcome home. ,[Exis Amba. Pol. This business is well ended. My liege and madam, to expostulate What Majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night night, and time is time, Were nothing but to waste night, day, id: tine. Therefore, since brevity's the foul of wit, And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes. I will be brief; your noble son is mad. Mad call I it; for to define true mnadnefs, What is't, but to be nothing elfc but tsad. But let that go. queen. More matter, with less art. Pol. Madam, I swear I are no art at all: That he is mad 'tis true; 'tis true, "tis pity; And pity, it is true; a foolish figure, But farewel it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him then; and now remains That we find out the cause of this effet, Or rather fay, the cause of this defe6t; For this effec defective, comes by cause, Thus it remains, and the remainder thus ---- Perpend ---- I have a daughter; have, whilf ihe is mine, Who c well-look'd.
Who in her duty and obedience, mark, Hath giv'n me this; now gather, and furmile. [He opens a letter, and reads.] To the celeflial, and my foul's idol, the mos beasutfied Ophelia. That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase, beautified is a vile phrase; but you (hall hear ----, Theft to her excellent white befolr, these--- ftieen. Came this from Hlamlet to her . Pol. Good madam flay a while, I will be faithful. Doubt thou, the flars are fire, [Reading. Doubt, tha't the fiun dth move ; Doubt truth to be a lar, But never doubt, I love. Oh dear Ophelia, I am ill at thee numnbers; I have not art to reckon my groans; but that I love thee heft, oh most best, believe it. Adieu. Thine evermore, mafl dear lady, whi/ this Machine is to him, Hamlet This in obedience hath my daughter shewn me: And more above, hath his follicitings, As they fell out by time, by means, and place, All given to mine ear. King. But how hath (he receiv'd his love ? Pol. What do you think of me? King. As of a man, faithful and honourable. Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think ? When I had seen his hot love on the wing, (As I perceiv'd it, I muf} tell you that Before my daughter told me,) what might you, Or my dear Majesty your QOeen here, think? If I had play'd the desk or table-book, Or given my heart working, mute and dumb, Or look'd upon this love with idle fight, What might you think ? no, I went round to work, And
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak; Lord Hamlet is a prince out of thy sphere, This must not be; and then, I precepts gave her, That the should lock her self from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens: Which done, the took the fruits of my advice, And he repulsed, a short tale to make, Fell to a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watching, thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and by this declension Jnto the madness wherein now he raves, And all we wail for. King. Do you think this? queen. It may be very likely. Pol. Hath there been such a time, I'd fain know that, That I have positively said, 'tis so, When it prov'd otherwise? King. Not that I know. Pol. Take this from this, if this be otherwise, If circumltances lead me, I will find Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the center. King. How may we try it further ? Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together, Here in the lobby. ueen. So he does indeed. Pol. At such a time I'11 loose my daughter to him, Be you and I behind an arras then, Mark the encounter: If he love her not, And be not from his reason fain thereon, Let me be no afliftant for a state, And keep a farm and carters. King. We will try it. SCENE
SCENE V. Enter Hamlet reading. gueen. But look where, sadly, the poor wretch comes reading. Pol. Away, I do beseech you, both away. I'll board him presently. [Exe. King and .2,ueen, Oh give me leave. How does my good lord Hamlet ? Ham. Well, God-a-mercy. Pol. Do you know me, my lord : Ham. Excellent well; y' are a fishmonger ? Pol. Not I, my lord. Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man. Pol. Honest, my lord ? Ham. Ay, Sir; to be honest as this world goes, is to be one pick'd out of ten thousand. Pol. That's very true, my lord. Ham. For if the fun breed maggots in a dead dog, Being a good kissing carrion ---- Have you a daughter ? Pol. I have, my lord. Ham. Let her not walk i'th' fun; conception is a blessing, but not as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to't. Pol. How fay you by that ? fill harping on my daughter ----- Yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger. He is far gone, and truly in my youth, [aside. I fuffered much extremity for love; Very near this. I'll speak to him again. What do you read, my'lord ? Ham. Words, words, words. Pol. What is the matter, my lord? Ham. Between whom? Pol. I mean the matter that you read, my lord. V o L. VI. Cc Ham.
Ham. Slanders, Sir: for the fatyrical slave says here, that old men have gray beards ? that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging thick amber, and plum-tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which, Sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down: for your self, Sir, Ihall be as old as-I-am, if like a crab you could go backward. Pol. Though this-be madness, yet there's method in't: Will you walk out of the air, my lord ? Ham. Into my grave ? Pol. Indeed that is out o'th' air: How pregnant (foretimes) his replies are ? A happiness that often madness hits on, Which faniry and reason could not be So profp'roufly diliver'd of. I'll leave him, And suddenly contrive the means of meeting Between him and my daughter. My honourable lord, I will most humbly Take my leave of you. Ham. You cannot, Sir, take from me any thing, that I will more willingly part withal, except my life. Pol. Fare you well, my lord. Ham. These tedious old fools. Pol. You go to seek lord Hamlet; there he is. [Exit. S C E N E VI. Enter Rofincroffe and Guildenifern. Rof. God save you, Sir. Guild. Mine honour'd lord ! Rof. My moaf dear lord! Ham. My excellent good friends! how dost thou Guildenflern ? Oh, Rofincrofe, good lads! how do ye both ? Ro0/:
Rof As the indifferent children of the earth. Guil. Happy, in that we are not over-happy; on fortune's cap, we are not the very button. Ham. Nor the foals of her flooe ? Rof Neither, my lord. Ham. Then you live about her waste, or in the middle of her favours ? Guti. Faith, her privates we. Ham. In the secret parts of fortune ? oh, most true; she is a strumpet. What news? Rof. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest. Ham. Then is dooms-day near; but your news is not true. f Let me question more in particular: what have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune, that (he sends you to prison hither ? Guil. Prison, my lord! Ham. Denmark's a prison. Rof Then is the world one. Ham. A goodly one, in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons; Denmark being one o'th' worst. Rof We think not so, my lord. Ham. Why then, 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is a prison. Rof Why then your ambition makes it one: 'tis too narrow for your mind. Ham. Oh God, I could be bounded in a nut-shell, and count my self a King of infinite space were it not that I have bad dreams. Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very sub- fiance of the ambitious, is meerly the shadow of a dream. Ham. A dream it self is but a shadow. Rof. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality, that it is but a fhadow's thadow. Ccc z Ham. 4 From this mark, several ,~eeches are net in the old edition.
Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and out-firetch'd heroes, the beggars shadows; Shall we to th'court? for by my fay, I cannot reason. Both. We'll wait upon you. Ham. No such matter. I will not fort you with the reft of my servants: for to (peak to you like an honest man, I am mofi dreadfully attended; but in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elfnoor 2 Rof. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion. Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you; and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a half-penny. Were you not Cent for? is it your own inclining? is it a free visitation? come, deal justly with me; come, come nay, speak. Gul. What should we fay, my lord? Ham. Any thing but to the purpose. You were Cent for; and there is a kind of confeffion in your looks, which your modefties have not craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen have lent for you. Rof To what end, my lord? Ham. That you mult teach me; but let me conjure you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preferved love, and by what more dear, a better proposer could charge you withal; be even and di- ret with me, whether you were sent for or no ? Rof What fay you ? Ham. Nay then I have an eye of you: if you love me, hold not off. Guil. My lord, we were sent for. Ham. I will tell you why, so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no feather. I have of late, but wherefore I know not, loft all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercise; and indeed, it goes so
so heavily with my disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a fleril promontory; this mofi excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave o'er-hanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me, than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in fa- culties! in form and moving how express and admirable! in amtion how like an angel! in apprehension how like a God! the beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! and yet to me, what is this quintessence of dut ? man delights not me; nor woman neither, tho' by your smiling you seem to fay so. Rof My lord there was no such ftuff in my thoughts. Ham. Why did you laugh, when 1 said, man delights not me? Rof. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, whatlen- ten entertainment the Players fhball receive from you; we accotR- ed them on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service. Ham. He that plays the King (hall be welcome; his majefly (hall have tribute of me;, the adventurous knight shall use his foyle and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man (hall end his part in peace; and the lady shall fay her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for't. What players are they ? Rof. Even those you were wont to take delight in, the Trage- dians of the city. Ham. How chances it they travel? their residence both in re- putation and profit was better, both ways. Rof I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation. Ham. Do they hold the fame estimation they did when I was in the city ? are they so follow'd ? Rof No indeed, they are not. Ham. How comes it? do they grow rusty ? Rof Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there
there is, Sir, an t Airy of Children, little yafes, that cry out on the top of question; and are molt tyrannically clapt for't; these are now the fashion, and so be-rattle the common lfages (so they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose quills, and dare scarce come thither. Ham. What, are they Children ? who maintains 'em ? how are they efcoted? will they pursue the Quality no longer than they can sing ? will they not fay afterwards, if they should grow them- selves to common players ? as it is most like, if their means are no better: their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession. Rof Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation holds it no fin, to tarre them to controverfie. There was for a while no money bid for argument, unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the queflion. Ham. Is't possible ? Guil. Oh there has been much throwing about of brains. Ham. Do the boys carry it away ? Rof. Ay, that they do, my lord, Hercules and his load too. Ham. It is not itrange; for mine uncle is King of Denmark, and those that would make mowes at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducates a-peice, for his pi&ture in little. There is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out. [FlouriT/ for the players. Guil. There are the players. Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elfinoor; your hands: come then, the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremo- ny. Let me comply with you in this garbe, left my extent to the players (which I tell you muff thew fairly outward) haould more appear like entertainment than yours. You are welcome; but my Uncle-father and Aunt-mother are deceiv'd. Guil. In what, my dear lord? Ham. t- Relating to the playhouses then contending, the Bankside, the Fortune, &c. -- play'd by the Children of his majefly's chappel.
Ham. I am but mad north, north-west: when the wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw. SCENE VII. Enter Polonius. Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen. Ham. Hark you, Guildenfjern, and you too, at each ear a hearer; that great baby you fee there, is not yet out of his (wath- ling clouts. Rof. Haply he's the second time come to them; for they fay, an old man is twice a child. Ham. I will prophefie, he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it, you fay right, Sir; for on Monday morning 'twas so indeed. Pol. My lord, I have news to tell you. Ham. My lord I have news to tell you, When RiJcius was an actor in Rome ------ Pol. The actors are come hither, my lord. Ham. Buzze, bczze. Pol. Upon mine honour------ Ham. Then came each ator on his ass----- Pol. The best adtors in the world, either for tragedy, come- dy, hiflory, pastoral, paftoral-comical, hiftorical-paftoral, scene undividable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light, for the law of wit, and the liberty. These are the only men. Ham. Oh Jephta, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou! Pal. What a treasure had he, my lord . Ham. IVhy one fair daughter, and no more, The which he loved passing well. Pol. Still on my daughter. Ham. Am I not i'th' right, old Jephta? Pol.
Pol. If you call me Jephta, my lord, I have a daughter that I love passing well. Ham. Nay, that follows not. Pol. What follows then, my lord ? Ham. Why as by lot, God mwot----and then you know, it came to pass, as mos like it was; the firfi row of the t rubrick will shew you more. For look where my abridgements come. Enter four or five players. Y'are welcome masters, welcome all. I am glad to fee thee well; welcome good friends. Oh! old friend! thy face is b valanc'd since I saw thee last: com'ft thou to beard me in Denmark? What my young lady and mistress ? berlady your ladyship is nea- rer heaven then whan I saw you last, by the altitude of at chiop- pine. Pray God your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.---- Masters, you are all welcome; we'll e'en to't like friendly faulconers, fly at any thing we fee; we'll have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your qua- lity; come, a passionate speech. I Play. What speech, my good lord? Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never a&ed: or if it was, not above once, for the play I remember pleas'd not the million, 'twas Caviar to the general; but it was, (as I receiv'd it, and others, whose judgment in such matters, cry- ed in the top of mine) an excellent play; well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said, there was no d salts in the lines, to make the matter savoury; nor no matter in the phrase, that might indite the au- thor of affeAion; but call'd it, an honest method. One speech in it I chiefly lov'd; 'twas AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam'slDaughter. If it live in '-- Rubrick. It is Pons chanfons in the firfl folio edition, the old ballads sung on brid- ges, and from thence call'd Pons chanfons. Hamlet is here repeating ends of old Jbngs. b 'valiant. " Chioppine, a high-heel'd Jloe, or a flipper. c french. d fllets. your
your memory, begin at this line, let me fee, let me see----The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian bear. It is not so --- it be- gins with Pyrrhus. The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose fable arms Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse; Hath now his dread and black comple&ion fmear'd With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total geules; horridly trickt With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Bak'd and impafted with the parching e fires, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To murthers vile. Roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o'er-cifed with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old granfire Priam seeks. Pol. 'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent, and good discretion. i Play. Anon he finds him, Striking, too short, at Greeks. His antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls Repugnant to command ; unequal match'd, Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage firikes wide, But with the whif and wind of his fell sword Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of rev'rend Priam, feem'd i'th' air to stick: So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus flood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. VOL. VI. Ddd But f ireets.
gqt as we often fee against some fqrrm, A silence in the be.v'ns, the rack .tand4 tijl, The bold winds speechless, and the orb below As hush as death: anon the dreadful trhuder Doth rend the region. So after Pyrrkuh' pae, A rowfed vengeance feks him nelq a-work, And never di4 the Cyclops hammers fall On Mars his armour, forg'd for proof eterne, With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleedirg s(9yr Now falls on Priam. --- Out, out, thou ftrumpet-fortune! all you g&pdg In general synod take away her power: Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down th.e h'll of hea'q,v As low as to the fiends. Pol. This is too long. Ham. Ic (hall to th' barber's icth, your beard,, Pr'ythee fay on; he's for a jigg, or a tale ofbawdry, or he fl?ps. Saiy on come to Hecuba. x Play. But who, oh wh9, had fen. the f mobled Qieen ? Ham. The mobled Queen? Pol. That's good; mob~id.Q Qa: e., is od. I Play. Run bare-foot up. aiad d.dvw, tcre~ rng t-he, flBgaes With biffon rheum; a clqout upon that head, Where late the diadem sod4, and for a robe About her lank and all q'er-teemed loyns, A blanket in th' alarm of fear caught up. Who this had seen, with tongue in venom fteep'd, 'Gainft fortune's fiate would treason have pronounc'd: But if the gods themselves did fee her then, When the saw Pyrrhus make ma!icipus f.ort In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs; The infitant burst of clamour that (he made,  In the first folio edition, it is tb' enobled Queen. n
(Unless things mortal move them not at all) Would have made g melt the burning eyes of heav'n, And passion in the gods. Pol. Look if he has not turn'd his colour, and has teats in's eyes. Pr'ythee no indre. Ham. 'Tis well, I'll have thee fpeik out the reft of this soon. Good my lord, will you fee the players well beftow'd. Do ye hear, let them be well us'd; for they are the abfra&t, and brief chronicles of the time. After your death, you were better have a bad epitaph, then their ill report *hile you liv'd. Pol. My lord, I will tfe them accordidg to their desert. Ham. Gods bodikins man, iiuchi better. Use every man as- ter his desert, and who shall scape whipping? use them after your own honour ard dignity. The leTs they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in. Pol. Come, Sirs. [Exit Polonius. Ham. Follow him, friends: we<l hear a play to-morrow. Dof thou hear me, old friend, can you play the murther of Gonzago ? Play. Ay, my lord. 1Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You tould for a need fludy a speech of fomrie doeni or sixteen lines, which I would set down, and insert in't? could ye not? Play. Ay, my lord. Ham. Very well. Follow thai lord, and look yobt isock him not. My good friends, l'll leave y0u 'till night, you are wel- come to Elfinoor. Rof Good my lord. [Exeunt. S C E N E VIII. Manet Hamlet. Ham. Ay so, God b' w' ye: now I am alone. Ddd z Oh g milch.
Oh what a rogue and peasant slave am I ? Is it not monstrous that this player here, But in a fi&ion, in a dream ofpaffion, Could force his foul so to his own conceit, That from her working, all his visage warm'd: Tears in his eyes, diftra&ion in his afpet, A broken voice, and his whole funtion suiting With forms, to his conceit? and all for nothing ? For Hecuba? What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, That he ihould weep for her ? what would he do, Had he the motive and the cue for passion That I have? he would drown the stage with tears, And cleave the gen'ral ear with horrid speech, Make mad the guilty, and appall the free, Confound the ign'rant, and amaze indeed The very faculty of eyes and ears.---- Yet I fay nothing; no, not for a King, Upon whole property and most dear life A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward ? Who calls me villain, breaks my pate a-cross, Plucks off my beard, and blows it in may face? Tweaks me by th' nose, gives me the lye i'th' throat, As deep as to the lungs ? who does me this ? i Yet I should take it --- for it cannot be, But I am pigeon-liver'd, and lack gall To make oppreflibn bitter; or ere this, I should have fatted all the region kites With this flave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain ! Remorseless, treacherous, letcherous, kindless villain. h ret I, A dull and muddy metled rascal peak Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause A.nd can fay nothing --- S i IHIa/ wbhyJ hould I take it? Why
Why wh at an ass am I . this is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murthered, Prompted to my. revenge by heav'n and hell, _ Mufi, like a whore, unpack my heart with words, A nd fall a cursing like a very drab----- A k fiallion!---- --fye upon't! soh! about my brain----- I've heard, that guilty creatures, at a play, Have by the very cunning of the scene Been firuck so to the foul, that presently They have proclaim'd their malefa6tions. For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ. I'll observe his looks, Play something like the murther of my father, Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks, I'll tent him to the quick; if he but blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be the devil, and the devil hath power T'affume a pleating thape, yea, and perhaps Out of my weakness and my melancholy, (As he is very potent with such spirits) Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds More relative than this: The play's the thing, Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King. [Exit. Sfcullion. ACT
ACT IIL SCENE I. The P AL AC . Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Op~elia, Roincrofie, Guildenifern, and Lords. K IN G. N D can yoa by no drift of conference Get from him why he puts on this b confufon, A Grating so hardily all his days of quiet, With turbulent and dang'rous lunacy ? Rof He does confef& he feels himaeif diflraded; But from what cause he will by no means speak. Guid. Nor do we find him forward to be founded; But with a crafty madness keeps aloof, When we would bring himn on to some confeffoa Of his true slate. gueen. Did he receive you well? Rof. Most like a gentleman. Guil. But with much forcing of his disposition. Rof Niggard ofqueftion, but of our demands Most free in his reply. queen. Did you assay him to any paflime? Rof. Madam, it so fell out, that cer~sain players We o'er-took on the way; of thefewe told him; And there did seem in him a kindL of joy To hear of it: they are about the court, And (as I think) they have already order This night to play before him. Pal. b confe.on, a c~rz~n/i~ance.
Pol. 'Tis most true: And he bereech'd me to entreat your majelies To hear and fee the mpatter. King.. With all my heart, and it doth much cottent me To hear him to inclia'd. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his purpose into these delights. Rof. We ihall, my lord. [Exeunt. King. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too, For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither, That he, as 'twere by .accident, may here Affront Ophelia. Her father, and; my self, Will so bestow our fevhes, that feeing unseen We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by him, as he is behaved, IPt be th' afflitiion of his love, or no, That thus he fuffers for. .Queen. I (hall obey you: And for my part, Oph(ika~ I do wifli That your good beauties be the happy cauLf Of Hamlet's wildness. So IV hope your virtues May bring him to his waonted way again, , To both your honours. Oph. Madam, I wish it may. Pol. Ophelia, walk you here. Gracioas, so please ye, We will bestow our selves: read on this hook, That shew of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness. We're oft to blame in this, 'Tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage, And pious a&ion we do fuger o'er The devil himself. King. Oh 'tis too true, How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! [aside. The
The harlot's cheek beautied with plaftring:art Is not more ugly to ,the thing-that helps it, Than is my deed to my moilt painted word. Oh heavy burthen! Pol. I hear him coming, let's withdraw my lord. .[Exeunt all but Ophelia. SCENE II. Enter Hamlet. Ham. To be, or not to be? that is the question---- Whether 'tis nobler in.the mind, to fuffer The flings and arrowstofoutragious fortune; Or to rake arms againfl a t sea of troubles, And by opposing end them ?.----To die,----- to sleep---- No more; and by a sleep to fay we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural. hocks That flesh is heir to; 'tis a consummation Devoutly to be wifh'd. To die ----- to sleep ----- To sleep? perchance to dream; ay, there's the rub----- For in that sleep of death what dreams may come, When we have fhuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause. There's the refpe~c That makes calamity of so long life. For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, Th' oppreffor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, The pang of defpis'd love, the law's delay, The insolence of office, and the spurns That patient merit of th' unworthy takes; When he himself might his juietus. make With a bare bodkin ? who would fardles bear, t Perhaps siege, which continues the metaphor of flings, arrows, taking arms .and represents the being encompajs'd on all sides with troubles. c poor. 3 To
To groan and sweat under a weary life? But that the dread of something after death, (That undifcover'd country, from whole bourne No traveller returns) puzzles the will, And makes us rather bear those ills we have, Than fly to others that we know not of. Thus conscience does make cowards of us all: And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought; And enterprizes of great pith and moment, With this regard, their currents turn d awry And lose the name of a&dion. ---- Soft you now, [Seeing Oph. The fair Ophelia ? nymph, in thy oraifons Be all my fins remembred. Oph. Good my lord, How does your honour for this many a day ? Ham. I humbly thank you; well,----- Oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yours, That I have longed much to re-deliver. I pray you now receive them. Ham. No, I never gave you ought. Oph. My honour'd lord, I know right well you did, And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd, As made the things more rich: that perfume loft, Take these again; for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor, when givers prove unkind. There, my lord. Ham. Ha, ha! are you honest? Oph. My lord----- Ham. Are you fair ? Oph. What means your lordship ? Ham. That if you be honest and fair, you fihould admit no discourse to your beauty. V oL. VI. Eee Oph. ' away.
Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honefy ? Ham. Ay truly; for the power of beauty will sooner trans- form honefly from what it is, to a bawd; than the force of ho- nefty can translate beauty into its likeness. This was sometimes a paradox, but now the time gives it proof I did love you once. Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so. Ham. You flbould not have believed me. For virtue cannot so innoculate our old stock, but we shall reli(h of it. sI lov'd you not. Oph. I was the more deceived& Hram. Get thee to a nitunery. Why wouldf thou be a bree- der of sinners ? I am my felt indifferent honefi, but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it were better my mother had not born me. I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck, than I have thoughts to put them in, ima- gination to give them shape, or time to a& them in. What thould such fellows' as I do crawling between heav'n and earth ? we are arrant knaves, believe none of us ---- -Go thy ways to a nunnery ----- Where's your father ? Oph. At home, my lord. Ham. Let the doors be fthut upon him, that he may play the fool no where but in's own house. Farewel. Oph. Oh help him, you sweet heav'ns! Ham. If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry. Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny ----- Get thee to a nunnery, ----farewel---- Or if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool; for wife men know well enough, what monsters you make of them ----- To a nunnery go------ and quickly too: farewel. Oph. Heav'nly powers! restore him. Ham. I have heard of yourg painting too, well enough : God has given you one" face, and you make your self another. You jig, you cevacntte u~ she ~fr~t Ca~i;jC;~i, t ~ srgcl Gove yot~ Q~t~. $ pratling. hpaEe.
you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God's creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go, I'll no more on't, it hath made me mad. I fay, we will have no more mnatages. Those that are married already, all but one, shall live, the reit /hall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go. [Exit Hamlet. Oph. Oh what a noble mind is here o'erthrown! The courtiers, soldiers, scholars, eye, tongue, sword! Th' expectancy and role of the fair state, The glass of fashion, and the mould of form, Th' obferv'd of all observers, quite, quite down! I am of ladies most dejea and wretched, That fuck'd the hony of his mufick vows: Now fee that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled out of tune, and harsh; That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth, Blaffed with ecifafie. Oh woe is me! T'have seen what I have seen; fee what I fee. SSCENE III. Enter King and Polonius. King. Love! his affeAions do not that way tend, Nor what he spake, tho' it lack'd form a little, Was not like madnels. Something's in his foul, O'er which his melancholy fits on brood, And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose Will be some danger, which how to prevent, I have in quick determination Thus set it down. He shall with speed to England, For the demand of our negle&ed tribute: Haply the seas and countries different, With variable objeas, thall expel This something fettled matter in his heart; E e z Where-
Whereon his brains still beating, puts him thus From fashion of himself.. What think you on't? Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I believe The origin and commencement of this grief Sprung from negle6ted love. How now, Ophelia ? You need not tell us what lord Hamlet said, We heard it all. My lord, do as you please; But if you hold it fit after the play, Let his Queen-mother all alone intreat him To shew his griefs; let her be round with him: And 'll be plac'd, so please you, in the ear Of all their conf'rence. If she find him not, To England fend him; or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think. King. It shall be so: Madnefi in great ones must not unwatch'd go, [Exeunt. SCENE IV. Enter Hamlet, and two or three of the Players. Hamn. P E A K the speech I pray you, as I pronounc'd it to you, trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our Players do, I had as lieve the town-crier had spoke my lines. And do not saw the air too much with your hand thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may fay, whirl-wind of your paflion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. Oh, it offends me to the foul, to hear a robuftous periwig-pated fellow tear a paflion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings: who (for the mos part) are capable of nothing, but inexplicable dumb thews, and noise: I could have such a fel- low whipt for o'er-doing termagant; it out-herods Herod. Pray you avoid it. Play.
Play. I warrant your honour. Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your tutor. Sute the adion to the word, the word to the ation; with this special observance, that you o'er-ftep not the modefly of nature; for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing; whose end both at the firflt and now, was and is, to hold as 'twere the mirror up to nature; to shew virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time, his form and pressure. Now this over-done, or come tardy off, tho' it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve: the censure of which one, must in your allow- ance o'er-fway a whole theatre of others. Oh, there be Players that I have seen play, and heard others praise and that highly, (not to speak it prophanely) that neither having the accent of' christian, or the gate of christian, pagan, *or man, have io strutted and bellow'd, that V have thought some of nature's jour- ney-men had made men, and not made them well; they imita- ted humanity so abominably. Play. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us. Ham. Oh reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns, speak no more than is set down for them: For there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren fpedators to laugh too, though in the mean time. some necessary question of the play be then to be considered V That's villanous, and thews a mofi pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready. [Exeunt Players. Enter Polonius, Rofincroffe, and Guildenftern. How now, my lord? will the King hear this piece of work ? Pol. And the Queen too, and that presently. Ham. Bid the Players make haste. [Exit Polonius. Will you two help to baften them ? Both. We will, my lord. [Exeunt. SCEN E i or Norman.
SCENE V. Enter Horatio to Hamlet. Ham. What ho, Horatio? Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service. Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man As e'er my conversation coap'd withal. Hor. Oh my dear lord ---- Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter: For what advancement may I hope from thee, That no revenue haft, but thy good spirits To feed and cloath thee ? Should the poor be flatter'd No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee, Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear? Since my dear foul was miflrefs of her choice, And could of men distinguish, her eleaion Hath feal'd thee for her self. For thou haif been As one, in fuffering all that fuffers nothing. A man, that fortune's buffets and rewards Hath ta'en with equal thanks. And blest are those, Whose blood and judgment are so well co-mingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger To found what flop 1he please. Give me that man That is not paffion's slave, and I will wear him In my heart's core: ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.----- Something too much of this. ----- There is a play to-night before the King, One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee, of my father's death. I pr'ythee, when thou feeft that a&t a-foot, Ev'n with the very comment of thy foul Ob-
Observe mine uncle: if his occult guile Do not it ielf unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghoff that we have seen: And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan's t ftichy. Give him heedful note, For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join, To censure of his seeming. Hor. Well, my lord. If he steal ought the whilf this play is playing, And scape detedting, I will pay the theft. S C E N E VI. Enter King, &ueen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rofincroffe, Guilden- stern, and other lords attendant, zwith a guard carrying torches. Danish march. Sound a flourkfh. Ham. They'regoming to the play; I must be idle. Get you a place. King. How fares our cousin Hamlet? Ham. Excellent i'faith, of the camelion's difl: I eat the air, promife-cramm'd: you cannot feed capons Co. King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet, thefre words are not mine. Hiam. No, nor mine now, my lord. You plaid once i'th' university, you fay ? [To Polonius. Pol. That I did, my lord, and was accounted a good adtor. Ham. And what did you enat ? Pol. I did ena& Julius Cafar, I was kill'd i~th' capitol: Brutus kill'd me. Ham. It was a brute part of him, to kill so capital a calf there. Be the players ready? Rof. t Stithy, a fmith's anvil
Rof. Ay, my lord, they fray upon your patience. cueen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, fit by me. Ham. No, good mother, here's mettle more attrative. Pol. Oh ho, do you mark that ? Ham. Lady, (hall I lye in your lap . - [Lying down at Ophelia's feet. Oph. No, my lord. Ham. Do you think I meant country matters? Oph. I think nothing, my lord. Ham. That's a fair thought to lye between a maid's legs. Oph. What is, my lord ? Ham. Nothing. Oph. You are merry, my lord. Ham. Who, I? Oph. Ay, my lord. Ham. Oh God, your only jig-maker; what. ihould a man do, but be merry? For look you how chearfully my mother looks, .and my father dy'd within these two hours. Oph. Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord. Ham. So long? nay then let the devil wear black, for I'll have a suit of fables. Oh heav'ns! dye two months ago, and not forgotten yet! then there's hope, a great man's memory may out-live his life half a year: but by'r-lady he muaf build churches then; or else (hall be fuffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse; whole epitaph is For oh, for oh, the hobby-horse is forgot. S CE N E VII. Hautboys play. The dumb Ihew enters. Enter a King and Queen, very lovingly; the Queen embracing him, and he her. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her
her neck. Lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She feeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his crown, kisses it, and pours poifonin the King's ears, and Exit. The ,ueen returns, finds the King dead, and makes pajfionate aEtlion. The poyfoner, with some two or three mutes come in a- gain, seeming to lament with her. The dead body is carried a- way. The poisoner wooes the gueen with gifts, Jhe seems loth and unwilling a while, but in the end accepts his love. [Exeunt. Oph. What means this, my lord ? Ham. Marry this is miching Mlalicho, that means mischief. Oph. Belike this (hew imports the argument of the play ? Ham. We (hall know by this fellow: the Players cannot .keep counsel, they'll tell all. Oph. Will he tell us what this shew meant ? Ham. Ay, or any shew that you'll thew him. Be not you ashamed to (hew, he'll not thame to tell you what it means. Oph. You are naught, you are naught, I'll mark the play. Enter Prologue. For us, and for our tragedy, Here flooping to your clemency, iWe beg your hearing patiently. Ham. Is this a prologue, or the pofie of a ring ? Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord. Ham. As woman's love. Enter King and ,tjieen, Players. King. Full thirty times hath Phoebus' car gone round Neptune's salt wash, and Tellus" orbed ground; And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen About the world have time twelve thirties been, Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual, in most sacred bands. V o L. VI F fs bueen.
tjieen. So many journeys may the fun and moon Make us again count o'er, ere love be done. But woe is me, you are so tick of late, So far from cheer and from your former frate, That I distrust you; yet though I diflrurf, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing mufl: And womens fear and love hold quantity, 'Tis either none, or in extremity; Now what my love is, proof hath made you know, And as my love is fix'd, my fear is so. King. Faith I must leave thee, love, and shortly too: My operant powers their funtions leave to do, And thou (halt live in this fair world behind, Honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind For husband (halt thou ----- d9ueen. Oh confound the relt! Such love mulf needs be treason in my breat : In second husband let me be accurst, None wed the second, but who kill'd the first. . Ham. Wormwood, wormwood! %ueen. The instances that second marriage move, Are bare refpcts of thrift, but none of love. A second time I kill my husband dead, When second husband kisses me in bed. King. I do believe you think what now you (peak; But what we do determine, oft we break: Purpose is but the slave to memory, Of violecr birth, but poor validity: W\hich now, like fruits unripe, sticks on the tree, But fall unshaken, when they mellow be. Most necessary 'tis that we forget, To pay our selves what to our selves is debt: What
What to our selves in passion we propose, The paflion ending, doth the purpose lose; The violence of either grief or joy, Their own ena&ors with themselves defroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth mofl lament; Grief joys, joy grieves on slender accident. This world is nor for aye, and 'tis not firange That ev'n our loves should with our fortunes change. For 'tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love fortune lead, or fortune love. The great man down, you mark his fav'rire flies; The poor, advanc'd, makes friends of enemies: And hitherto doth love on fortune tend, For who not needs, shall never lack a friend; And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy. But orderly to end where I begun, Our wills and fates do so contrary run, That our devices still are overthrown, Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own. So think thou wilt no second husband wed, But die thy thoughts, when thy firfi lord is dead. .ueen. Nor earth to give me food, nor heaven light, Sport and repose lock from me, day and night; Each opposite that blanks the face of joy, Meet what I would have well, and it defiroy, Both here, and hence, pursue me lasting strife! If once a widow, ever I be wife. Ham. If the should break it now----- King. 'Tis deeply sworn; sweet, leave me here a while, My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile The tedious day with sleep. [Sleeps. Fff ~t~eera,
Queen. Sleep rock thy brain, And never come mischance beetween us twain! [Exit. Ham. Madam, how like you this play? 9ueen. The lady protests too much, methinks. Ham. Oh but fhe'll keep her word. King. Have you heard the argument, is there no offence in't ? Ham. No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest, no offence i'th' world. King. What do you call the play ? Ham. The Mouse-trap. Marry how ? topically. This play is the image of a murther done in Vienna; Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptifla; you (hall fee anon, 'tis a knavish piece of work; but what o' that your majefly, and we that have free fouls, it touches us not; let the gall'd jade winch, our withers are unwrung. Enter Lucianus. This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King. Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord. " Ham. I could interpret between you and your love; if I could fee the puppets dallying. Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen. Ham. It would cofl you a groaning, to take off my edge. Oph. Still worse and worse. Ham. So you mufl take your husbands. Begin murtherer. Leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge. Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing: Confederate season, else no creature feeing: Thou mixture rank, of midnight-weeds colle&ed, With Hecate's bane, thrice blasted, thrice infeaed, Thou natural magick, and dire property, On wholfome life usurp immediately. [Pours the poison in his ears. ham.
1Ham. He poyfons him i'th' garden for's estate; his name's Gonzago ; the fRory is extant, and writ in choice Italian. You shall fee anon how the murtherer gets the love of Gonzago's wife. Oph. The King rises. Queen. How fares my lord Pol. Give o'er the play. King. Give me rome light. Away. All. Lights, lights, lights! [Exeunt. SCENE VIII. Manent Hamlet and Horatio. Ham. Why let the frucken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play: For frome mutl watch, whill frome mu: sleep; So runs the world away. Would not this, Sir, and a forest of feathers, (if the reft of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two provincial roses on my m rayed hbooes, get me a fellowthip in a cry of Players, Sir ? Hor. Half a (hare. Ham. A whole one I. For thou dolt know, oh Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself, and now reigns here A very very " peacock. Hor. You might have rim'd. Ham. Oh good Horatio, I'll take the ghofl's word for a thousand pounds. Didft perceive? Hor. Very well, my lord. Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning ? Hor. I did very well note him. Enter a rack'd, rac'd. n .a;ock. 'his alludes to a Fable of the .Birds chuJfig a King inflead of the Eagle, a Peacock.
Enter Rofincroffe and Guildenftern. Ham. Oh, ha! come some mufick. Come the recorders. For if the King like not the comedy; Why then belike he likes it not perdy. Come, some mufick. Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you. Ham. Sir, a whole history. Guil. The King, Sir----- Ham. Ay Sir, what of him? Guil. Is in his retirement, marvellous diftemper'd----- Ham. With drink, Sir ? Guil. No, my lord, with choler. Ham. Your wisdom should (hew it felif more rich to fignifie this to his doaor: for me to put him to his purgation, would perhaps plunge him into more choler. Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start not so wildly from my affair. Ham. I am tame, Sir, pronounce. Guil. The Queen your mother, in mofR great affli6tion of fpi- rit, hath sent me to you. Ham. You are welcome. Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtefie is not of the right breed. If it (hall please you to make me a wholfobm answer, I will do your mother's commandment; if not, your par- don, and my return (hall be the end of my business. Ham. Sir, I cannot. Guil. What, my lord ? Ham. Make you a wholfom answer: my wit's difeas'd. But, Sir, such answers as I can make, you shall command, or rather you fay, my mother ------therefore no more but to the matter ----.- my mother, you fay ---- Rof
Rof Then thus the says; your behaviour hath struck her into amazement, and admiration. Ham. Oh wonderful son, that can so aflonifh a mother. But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother-admiration ? Rof. She desires to speak with you in her closer ere you go to bed. Ham. We (hall obey, were the ten times our mother. Have you any further trade with us ? Rof. My lord, you once did love me. Ham. So I do fill, by there pickers and flealers. Rof Good my lord; what is your cause of dilltemper ? you do surely bar the door of your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to your friend. Ham. Sir, I lack advancement. Rof. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself, for your succession in Denmark? Ham. Ay, but while the grass grows ---- the proverb is bome- thing multy. Enter one with a Recorder. Oh the recorders, let me fee one. To withdraw with you----- -why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil ? Guil. Oh my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly. Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe? Guil. My lord, I cannot. Ham. I pray you. Guil. Believe me, I cannot. Ham. I do bcefech you. Guil. I know no touch of it, my lord. Ham. 'Tis as eafic as lying; govern these ventiges with your fin-
Ifingers and thumb, :give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent mufick. Look you, there are the flops. Guil. But there cannot I command to any utterance of harmo- ny, I have not the skill. .am. Why look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me; you would play upon me, you would seem to know my flops; you would pluck out the heart of my myflery, you would found me from my lowers note, to the top of my compass; and there is much mufick, excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. Why do you think that I am eaiier to be plaid on than a pipe? call me what infirument you will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me. God bles you, Sir. Enter Polonius. Pol. My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently. Ham. .Do you fee yonder cloud, that's almost in shape of a Camel? Pol. By the mats, and it's like a Camel indeed. Ham. Methinks it is like an t Ouzde. Pol. It is black like an Ouzle. Ham. Or like a Whale? Pol. Very like a Whale. Ham. Then will I come to my mother by and by; they fodl me to the top of my bent. I will come by and by. Leave me friends. I will fay so. By and by is easily said. [Exeunt. 'Tis now the very witching time of night, When church-yards yawn, and hell it self breaths out Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood, And do such bitter business as the day -Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother---- Oh heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever The t_ .dn Ouzle or Blackbird : it has been printed by mistake a Weefel, which is not black,
The foul of Nero enter this firm bosom; Let me be cruel, not unnatural; I will speak daggers to her, but use none. My tongue and foul in this be hypocrites! [Exit, SCENE IX. Enter King, Rofincroffe, and Guildenftern. King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us To let his madness rage. Therefore prepare you i I your commission will forthwith dispatch, And he to England shall along with you. The terms of our estate may not endure Hazard to near us, as doth hourly grow Out of his lunacies. Guild. We will provide our selves; Mol} holy and religious fear it is, To keep those many bodies safe, that live And feed upon your majesty. Rof The single and peculiar life is bound With all the strength and armour of the mind, To keep it self from noyance; but much more, That spirit, on whose o weal depends and rests The lives of many. The decease of majesty Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw What's near it with it. It's a massy wheel Fixt on the summit of the highest mount, To whole huge fpoaks ten thousand lesser things Are mortiz'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls, Each small annexment, petty consequence, Attends the boiftrous ruin. Ne'er alone Did the King sigh, but with a general groan. King. Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage; VOL. VI. G g g For o spirit
For we will fetters put upon this fear, Which now goes too free-footed. Both. We will hafle us. [Exiant Gent. Enter Polonius. Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet; Behind the arras I'll convey my self To hear the process. P'll warrant (he'll tax him home. And as you said, and wifely was it said, 'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother, (Since nature makes them partial,) should o'er-hear The speech of vantage. Fare you well my liege, I'll call upon you ere you go to bed, And tell you what I know. [Exit. King. Thanks, dear my lord. ' Oh my offence is rank, it smells to heav'n, ' It hath the primal eldest curse upon't; 'A brother's murther. Pray I cannot, ' Though inclination be as sharp as will: ' My fironger guilt defeats my firong intent, ' And like a man to double business bound, ' I fland in pause where I shall firif begin, ' And both negle&. What if this cursed hand ' Were thicker than it self with brother's blood ? ' Is there not rain enough in the sweet heav'ns ' To wash it white as snow ? whereto serves mercy, ' But to confront the visage of offence ? ' And what's in prayer, but this two-fold force, ' To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall, ' Or pardon'd being down? then I'll look up. ' My fault is pass. But oh what form of prayer ' Can serve my turn ; Forgive me my foul marther ! ' That cannfot be, since I am till polffet
' Of those effe&s for which I did the mwther, ' My crown, mine own ambition, and my Qpeea, ' May one be pardon'd, and retain th' offence? < In the corrupted currents of this world, ' Offence's gilded hand may (hove by juflice; ' And oft 'tis seen, the wicked prize it self ' Buys out the law; but 'tis not so above: ' There is no fhuffling, there the acion lies ' In his true nature, we our selves compeli'd ' Ev'n to the teeth and forehead of our faults, ' To give in evidence.' What then ~ what rests? Try what repentance can. What can it not ? Yet what can it, when one cannot repent ? Oh wretched slate! oh bosom, black as death! Oh limed foul, that ifruggling to be free, Art more engag'd! help angels, make assay! Bow Rfubborn knees, and heart with firings of steel Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe! All may be well. , [The King kneels. SCENE E~z4'r J-Lln3lgr. Ham. TNow might I do it pat, now he is praying, And now I'll do't---- and so he goes to heav'n, And so am I reveng'd ? that would be fcann'd,---- A villain kills my father, and for that I, his sole son, do this fame villain fend To heav'n---- 0 thiis s Phire and &th1ery, not revenge. He took my father grofly, ~1 l of bxead, With all his crimes broad blown, as ' flush as May And how his audit fiands, who knows, save heav'n ? But in our circumfiance and course of thought, G g g z a aa/e and filly. Ed. prim, ' fre;j 'Tis X.
'Tis heavy with him. Am I then reveng'd, To take him in the purging of his foul, When he is fit and feafon'd for his paiffage? Up sword, and know thou a more horrid r time: When he is drunk, asleep, or in his rage, Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed, At gaming, swearing, or about Come a& That has no relish of salvation in't, Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heav'n, And that his foul may be as damn'd and black As hell, whereto it goes. My mother slays; This phyfickbut prolongs thy sickly days. [Exit. King. My words fly up, my thoughts remain below; Words, without thoughts, never to heaven go. [Exit. SCENE XI. The Queen's Apartment. ,a Enter Queen and Polonius. Pl. U E will come firaight; look you lay home to him, . Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, And that your Grace hath fcreen'd, and flood between Much heat and him. I'll silence me e'en here; Pray you be round. Q)ueen. I'll warrant you, fear me not. Withdraw, I hear him coming. [Polonius hides himself behind the Arras. Enter Hamlet. Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter? dueen. Hamlet, thou haft thy father much offended. am bent ' hernt
Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended. Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue. Ham. Go, go, you question with !a wicked tongue. Queen. Why how now, Hamlet? Ham. What's the matter now ? Queen. Have you forgot me? Ham. No, by, the rood, not so; You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife, And (would it were not so) you are my mother. ueen. Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak. Ham. Come, come, and fit you down; you shall not budge: You go not 'till I set you up a glass Where you may fee the inmost part of you. Q)ueen. What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murther, me ? Help, ho. Pol. What ho, help. [Bebind the Arras. Ham. How now, a rat? dead for a ducate, dead. Pol. Oh I am slain. [Ham. kills Polonius. Queen. Oh me, what haa thou done? Ham. Nay I know not: is it the King? Queen. Oh, what a rath and bloody deed is this Ham. A bloody deed, almoat as bad, good mother, As kill a King, and marry with his brother. &ueen. As kill a King? Ham. Ay lady, 'twas my word. Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewel, [To Polonius. I took thee for thy better; take thy fortune; Thou find'ft, to be too bufie, is some danger. Leave wringing of your hands, peace, fit you dowh, And let me wring your heart, for so I Ihall If it be made of penetrable fluff; If damned cuflom have not braz'd it so, That it is proof and bulwark againit sense. Q ueen. an idle
,yueesf. What have I done, that thou dar'ft wag thy tongue In noise io ~ude agaimaf me. 11am. 5tch an aat, That blurs the grace and biufh of modeflr, Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose From the fair forehead of an ioanocenit love, And lets a blister there; makes marriage-vows As false as dicers oaths. 0 such a deed, As from the aodt of contration plucks The -very foul, Mnd sweet religion makes A rhapsody 9f wr ds. Heav'n's face doth glkw O'er this solidity and compound maf6, With tristful visage as against the doom. 'Tis ihoaghtt-fi<k ^c the a&s. ,,ueen. Ay me, what a&t, That oarQs SO loud, and thunders in the inde~.? Ham. Jsk he poa rh tis pi&xwe, and on thbis, T.he ~coure~rfeit presentment of two brsthers: See what a grace wa &eated .n tthis bow, [lyperion's curies, th1e fonr ps 7ove hin4lo, An eye like Mar, jo thotrea~n or ~oonn'Cm nd, A ftatioa IlIfe tbe :haeratld Meracry New-lighted on a raa~i'-kid.rg Ii l; A combination, and a form indeed, Where every God did feerm to 'fet his ~sel, To ,gije (ihe woyql :afaranioe of w ,saan. This was your haseb .---- Laaok yoe Inow what flIo~w, Here is your hus.ba.nd, lifce a zi.deiMewl e'r, Blasting his Jhao!-oe brxther. Have -you eyes Could you on this :fiir x uamio reae to feed, And batten on this moore? h'i hs av, s ceyvs? You cannot call it locwe; for i yorer age, The hey-day in the feaiwl is tarir, i's hwmrbt, And
And waits upon the judgmenti atP what judgigenui Would flep from thid to rhis: wharmfevil: was?, That thus hath cozen'cd you at hoodnman blind ? 0 shame ! where is thy blulh? rebellions} hell If thou canst mutiny in a matron' bones, To flaming youth let vittae be as wax, And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no fame, When the compulsive ardour gives the charge, Since frost it self as astively cdoth burn, And reason pardons will. >ueen. 0 Hamlet, speak no more. Thou turn'ft mine eyes into my very sout, And there I fee such blMack and grained spots As will not leave their tind&. Ham. Nay, but to live In the rank sweat of an incestuous bed, Stew'd in corruption, honying. and making love Over the nasty fly. queen. Oh speak no more, These words like daggers enter in mine ears. No more, sweet Hamlet. Ham. A murderer, and a villain! A slave, that is not twentieth part the tyche Of your precedent lord. A vice of Kings, A cutpurse of the empire and the rule, That from a ihelf the precious diadem flole And put it in his pocket. Enter Ghost. A King of ffireds and patches-- Save me! and hover o'er me with your wings [Startj g up. You heav'nly guards! what would your gracious figure? Queen. Alas he's mad. Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide, That t or, panders.
That laps'd in time 'and passion, lets goby Th' important ading of your dread command-? O fay.-- Ghost. Do not forget: this visitation Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose. But look! amazement on thy mother fits; O flep between her and her fighting foul: Conceit in weakefi bodies ftrongef works. :Speak to her Hamlet. Ham. How is it with you, lady? c2ueen. Alas, how is't with you ? That thus you bend your eye on vacancy, And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse? Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep, And as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm, Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements, Start up, and iftand an end. O gentle son, UCpon the heat and flame of thy diflemper Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look? Ham. On him! on him !---- look you how pale he glares! Hlis form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones, Would make them capable. Do not look on me, Left with this pitious aaion you convert My stern effets ; then what I have to do, Will want true colours tears perchance for blood. 9,ueen. To whom do you speak this ? Ham. Do you fee nothing there? [Point ng to the Ghofj. >ueen. Nothing at all, yet all that is I fee. Ham. Nor did you nothing hear? Jueen. No, nothing but our selves. Ham. Why look you there? look how it steals away! My father in his habit as he lived! Look where he goes ev'n now out at the portal. .[Exit Ghost. Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain, 9 This
This bodiless creation Ecftafie Is very cunning in. Ham. What ecftafie? My pulse, as yours, doth temp'rately keep time, And makes as healthful mufick. 'Tis not madness That I have utter'd; bring me to the test And I the matter will re-word; which madness Would gamboll from. Mother, for love of grace, Lay not that flattering undion to your foul, That not your trespass, but my madness speaks: It will 'but skin and film the ulcerous place, Whilst rank corruption running all within, Inse6ts unseen. Confers your self to heav'n, Repent what's pail, avoid what is to come, And do not spread the compoit on the weeds To make them ranker. Forgive this my virtue, For in the fatness of there purfie times; Virtue it self of vice must pardon beg, Yea, curb, and wooe, for leave to do it good. 9jueen. Oh Hamlet / thou halt cleft my heart in twain. Ham. 0 throw away the worser part of it, And live the purer with the other half. Good night; but go not to mine uncle's bed. Assume a virtue, if you have it not. That monfler custom, who all sense doth eat, Of habit's devil, is angel yet in this; That to the use of ations fair and good, He likewise gives a frock or livery That aptly is put on: Refrain to-night, And that shall lend a kind of easiness To the next abstinence; the next more eafie; For use can almost change the stamp of nature, And mailer ev'n the devil, or throw him ouc V oL.VI. H hh With t mining, edit. prim.
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night! And when you are desirous to be blefl, I'll blessing beg of you. For this fame lord, [Poilntig to Pol. I do repent: hut heav'n hath pleas'd it so, To punish me with this, and this with me, That I muf be their scourge and minifier. I will befltow him, and will answer well The death I gave him; so again, good night. I must be cruel, only to be kind ; Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind. .Queen. What shall I do? Ham. Not this by no means that I bid you do. " Let the fond King tempt you again to ,bed, Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse, And let him for a pair of reechy kisses, Or padling in your neck with his damnud !fingers, Make you to ravel all this mnatter out, That I efrentially am not in mradnefs, But mad in craft. 'Twere goold you let him know. For who that's but a Queen, fair, sober, wife, Would from a' paddock, from a,bat, a gibbe, Such dear concernings hide? who would do so? No, in defpight of sense and fec:ecy, Unpeg the basket on the bpufe&s top, Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape To try conclusions; in the basket creep, And break your own neck down. Qfueen. Be thou affur'd, if words be made of breath, And breath of life: I have no life to breathe What thou has said to me. Ham. I must to England, you know that? Queen. Alack, I had forgot; 'tis so concluded on.. Ham. t In the old edition it is, Let the blote King--tle word signifies fond, or puff'd up, or full-blooded, rubore fuffufus, Skinner.
t Ham. There's letters feal'd, and my two fchool-fellows, (Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,) They bear the riiandate; they mufit sweep my way And marshal me to knavery: let it work--- For 'tis the sport to have the engineer Hoi f with his own petar: an't shall go hard But I will delve one yard below their mines, And blow them at the moon, 0 'tis mofi sweet When in one line two crafts diretly meet! This man shall set me packing; I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room; Mother, good ntight. Indeed this counsellor Is now most still, most secret, and most grave, Who was in life a foolish prating knave. Come, Sir, to draw toward an end with you. Good night, mother. [Exit Hamlet, tuggng n Polonius. ACT IV. SCENE I. A Royal Apartment. Enter Kzng and Queen. KING. ^ Here's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves You must translate, 'tis fit we understand them. T Where is your son? [night ? Queen. Ah, my good lord, what have I seen to Kming. What, Gertrude? how- does Hamlet? Queen. Mad as the seas, and wind, when both contend Which is the mightier; in his lawlelfs fit, H hh z Behind t The ten following verses are added out of the old edition.
Behind the arras hearing something fir, He whips his rapier out, and cries, a rat! And in his brainish apprehension, kills The unseen good old man. King. Oh heavy deed! It had been so with us, had we been there: His liberty is full of threats to all, To you your seif, to us, to every one. Alas, how shall this bloody deed be anfwer'd ? It will be laid to us, whose providence Should have kept short, reftrain'd, and out of haunt This mad young man. But so much was our love, We would not underitand what was most fit . But like the owner of a foul disease, To keep it from divulging, lets it feed Ev'n on the pith of life. Where; is he gone? Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd, O'er whom his very madness, like some ore Among a mineral of metals base, Shews it self pure. He weeps for what is done. King. Oh Gertrude, come away: The fun no sooner (hall the mountains touch, But we will ship him hencei and this vile deed We must, with all our majeffy and skill, Both countenance, and excuse. Ho! Guildenflern .t Enter Rofincroffe and Guildenflern. Friends both, go join you with fbrme further aid : Hamlet in madness hath Polonitus slain, And from his mother's closet hath he drag'd him. Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body Into the chappeL Pray you haste in this. [Ex. Rof. andGuit. Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wifefgt friends, And
And let them know both what we mean to do, And what's untimely done. Oh come away, My foul is full of discord and dismay. [Exeunt. S C EE N E II. Enter Hamlet. Ham. Safely tlowed--- Gentlemen within. Hamlet / lord Hamlet! Ham. What noise? who calls on Hamlet ? Oh here they come. Enter Rofincroffe and Guildenpftern, Rof. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body? Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin. Rof. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence, And bear it to the chappek Ham. Do not believe it. Rof. Believe what? Ham. That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own, Besides, to be demanded of a fpunge, what replication should be made by the son of a King ? Rof. Take you me for a fpunge, my lord? Ham. Ay, Sir, that fokes up the King's countenance, his rewards, his authorities; but such officers do the King. best ser- vice in the end; he keeps them like an apple in the corner of his jaw; firif mouth'd, to be lafi fwallow'd: when he needs what you have glean'd, it is but squeezing you, and fpunge, you shall be dry again. Rof. I understand you not, my lord. Ham. I am glad of it; a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear. Rof. My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go with us to the King. Ham. a ape
Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body. The King is a thing-- Guild. A thing, my lord? Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him, hide fox, and all after. [Exeunt. S CENE III. Enter King. King. I've tent to seek him, and to find the body; How dang'rous is it that this man goes loose! Yet must not we put the strong law on him; He's lov'd of the diftrataed multitiide, Who like not in their judgment, but th:eij~r eyes: And where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd, But never the offence. To bear all fimooth, This sudden sending hiim away, must seem Deliberate pause: diseases defp'rate grown, By desperate appliance are relieved, Or not at all; Enter Rofincrofle. How now ? what hath befall'n? Rof. Where the dead body is beffow'd, my lord, We cannot get from him. King. But where is he? Rof. Without, my lord, guarded to know your pleafuire. King. Bring him before us. Rof. Ho, GuildenfJtern/ bring in my lord. Enter Hamlet and Guildenftern. King. Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius? -Ham. A tfapper. King.
King. At supper? where? f-lam. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certain convocation of politique worms are at him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat our selves for maggots. Your fat King and your lean beggar is but variable service, two dishes to one tai- ble, that's the end. Kmng. Alas, alas! Ham. t A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a King, and eat of the fifb that hath fed of that worm. King. What dost thou mean by this ? Ham. Nothing but to shew you how a King may go a progress through the guts of a beggar. King. Where is Palonius? Ham. In heav'n, fend thither to fee. If your messenger find him not there, seek him i'th' other place your seif. But indeed, if you find him not this month, you fball nofehim as you go up the flairs into the lobbey. King. Go seek him there. Ham. He will flay 'till ye come. King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety (Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve For that which thou hafi done) must fend thee hence With fiery quickness; then prepare thy seif, The bark is ready, and the wind at help, Th' associates tend, and every thing is bent For England. Ham. For England? King. Ay, Hamlet. Ham. Good. King. So is it, if thou knew'fit our purposes. Ham. I fee a Cherub that fees them; but come, for Eng- land! farewel, dear mother. "tadded from the old edit.
King. Thy loving father, Hamlet. Ham. My mother: father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come, for England. [Exit. King. Follow him at foot, tempt him with speed aboard; Delay it not, I'll have him hence to-night. Away, for every thing is feal'd and done That else leans on th' affair; pray you make haste. And England! if my love thou hold'ft at ought, As my great power thereof may give thee sense, Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red After the Dan'fh sword, and thy free awe Pays homage to' us; thou may'ft not coldly set Our sovereign procels, which imports at full By letters b congruing to that effet, The present death of Hamlet. Do it England: For like the he&ick in my blood he rages, And thou must cure me; 'till I know 'tis done, How-e'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin. [Exit. S C E N E IV. A Camp. Enter Fortinbras ^with an army. For. ( 0, captain, from me, greet the Danfh King, J Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras Claims the conveyance of a promis'd march Over his realm. You know the rendevouz. If that his majefly would ought with us, We (lall express our dutyin hbis eye, And let him know so. conring Capt. b conjucring
Capt. I will do't, my lord. For. Go fobftly on. [Exit Fortinbras. Enter Hamlet, Rofincrofle, @'c. Ham. Good Sir, whose powers are these? Capt. They are of Norway, Sir. Ham. How c purpos'd Sir, I pray you? Capt. Against some part of Poland. Ham. Who commands them, Sir? Capt. The nephew of old Norway, Fortimbras. Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, Sir, Or for some frontier? Capt. Truly to speak it, and with no addition, We go to gain a little patch of ground That hath in it no profit but the name. To pay five ducats, five I would not farm it, Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole A ranker rate, ihould it be d fold in fee. Ham. Why then the Polacke never will defend it. Capt. Yes, 'tis already garrifon'd. Ham. Two thousand fouls, and twenty thousand ducats Will not debate the quefition of this straw; This is th' impoflhume of much wealth and peace That inward breaks, and shews no cause without Why the man dies. I humbly thank you, Sir. Cap. God b'w'ye, Sir. Roft Will't please you go, my lord.? Ham. I'll be with you, go a little before. [Ex Manet Hamlet. How all occasions7 do inform against me, And spur my dull revenge? :what is a matn, If his chief good and market of his time VI-'f'. l. Ii i cpropos'd d f J S Be Be ;unk.
Be but to sleep and feed ? a beat, no more. Sure e he thati made us with such large discourse, Looking before and after, -gave us not That capability and god-like reafobn To rufi in us unus"di Now whether it be Befitial oblivion, or some craven scruple Of thinking too precisely on th' event, (A thought which quarter'd hath but one part wisdom, And ever three parts coward:) I do not know Why yet I live to fay this thing's to do, Sith I have cause, and Will, and strength, and means To do't. Examples grots as earth exhort me; Witness this army of such mali and charge, Led by a delicate and tender prince, Whose spirit with divine ambition puft Makes mouths at the invi'ible event, Exposing what is mortal and unsure To all that fortune, death, and danger dare, Ev'n for an egg-shell. 'Tis not to be great, Never to stir without great argument; But greatly to find quarrel in a fItraw, When honour's at the sPake. How fland I then,, That have a father kill'd, a mother ftain'd, (Excitements of my reason and my blood)' And let all sleep, while to my lhame I fee The imminent death of twenty thousand men, That for a fantafie and trick of fame Go to their graves like beds; fight for a spot Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause, Which is not tomb enough and continent To hide the slain? O -then from this time forth, My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth. SC E NE
SCENE V. A Palace. Enter 9jieen, Horatio, and a Gentleman. Queen. T Will not speak with her. J. Gent. She is importunate, Indeed diltra&; her mood will needs be pitied. aueen. What would she have? "Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears There's tricks i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart, Spurns enviously at ifraws, speaks things in doubt That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing, Yet the unihaped use of it doth move The hearers to colle&ion ; they aim at it, And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts, Which as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them, Indeed would make one think there might be thought; Though nothing Cure, yet much unhappily. Hor. 'Twere good she were spoken with, for Oie may firow Dangerous conjecures in ill-breeding minds. Let her come in--- Q2ueen. To my ick ioul, as fin's true nature is, Each toy seems prologue to rbme great amnnifi, So full of artlef jealoufie is guilt, It spills it self in fearing to be piUt. Enter Ophelia diftraEted. Oph. Where is the beauteous majeffy of Denmark? .deen. How now, Ophelia? Oph. How should I your true love know from anotoer one? By his cockle hat and flaff, and his fandalihoon. [Singing. I ii z Queen.
9>ueen. Alas, sweet lady; what imports this song? Oph. Say you? nay, pray you mark. He's dead and gone, laidy, he is dead and gone, /At his head a graft-green turf, at .Wisheels a fJone. ', Ent*r .KKing;- Sjueen. Nay, but Ophelia.--." Oph. Pray you mark. - Wlhite his fhLr'owd as the. moiuntain snow. Queen. Alas, look here, my lord.- Oph. Larded with sweet flowers: Which bewept to: the grave did go, Wrtth true-lote flJowers. King. How do ye,: pretty lady ? Oph. Well, God dil'd you. They fay the owl was a baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be -at your table. King. ConCeit upon her father. Oph. Pray let us have no words of this; but when they ask you what it means, fay you this: 7-mnorrow is St. Valentine's day, all in the morn betime, And I a maid at your window, to be your Valentine. Then up he rose, and don'd his c/oaths, and dupt the chamber-door ; Let in a maid, that out a maid never departed more. KGng. Pretty Ophelia! Oph. Indeed? without an oath, I'll make an end on't. By Gis, and by S. Charity; Aatck, andie so aiie rn, oTeung men will do't, if they come to't, By cock they are to blame' .uoth Jhe, before you tumbled me, Tou lromis'd me to wed: - -.Ss
So would I ha' done, by yonder fun, And thou hadst not come to my bed. King. How long hath she been thus? Oph. I hope all will be well. We must be patient, brut I canqot chute but weep, to think they (hould lay him i'th' cold ground ; my brother shall know of it, and so I thank you for your good' counsel. Come, my coach; good-night, ladies;, good-night,. sweet ladies; good-night,. good-night. [Exit.. King. Follow her close, give her good watch, I pray you;, This is the poison of deep grief, it springs All from her father's death. 0 Gertrude, Gertrude /' When sorrows come, they come not single spies, But in battalions. Firfi, her father slain, Next your son gone, and he most violent author Of his own jufit remove; the people muddied, Thick and unwholfome in their thoughts and whispers1. For good Polonius" death. We've done but greenly, In private to inter him; poor ptBelia Divided from- her self, and her fair judgment, (Without the which we're pitures, or mere beaus:) Lass, and as much containing as all these, Her brother is in secret come from France, - Feeds on this wonder, keeps himrf'elf in cloudg, And wants not buzzers to infe& his ear With peftilentfpeeches of his father's death;- Wherein neceflity, of matter beggar'd, Will nothing flick our persons to arraign In ear and ear. 0 my deak Gertrude, this, . Like to a murdering piece in many places, Gives me fiiperflious death! . . [A'Ndfr'vit. s.. E N-B
SCENE VI. Enter a Messenger. Kig. Where are my Swutzers ? let them guard the door. What is the matter ? Mef. Save your self, my lord. The ocean over-peering of his lift Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste, Than young Laertes, in a riotous head, O'er-bears your officers; the rabble call him lord, And as the world were now but to begin, Antiquity forgot, cufCom not known, The ratifiers and props of every word; They cry, chufe we Laertes for our King. Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the Clouds. Laertes liall be King, Laertes King, Queen. How chearfully on the false trail they cry, Oh this is counter, you false Damnid dogs. [Noise wzthn. Enter Laertes. King. The doors are broke. Laer. Where is the King ? Sirs! stand you all without. All. No let's come in. Laer. I pray you give me leave. A111. We will, we will. Laer. I thank you; keep the door. O thou vile King, give me my father. Queen. Calmly, good Laertes. Laer. That drop of blood that's calm, proclaims me bastard, Crys cuckold to my father, brands the harlot Even here between the chaste and unfmich'd brow Of my true mother. King.
King. What is the cause, .Laeres, That thy rebellion looks so giant-like ? Let him go, Gertrude; do not fear our person : There's such divinity doth hedge a King That treason can but peep to what it wv4d, A&ts little of its will. Tell me, Laertes, Why are you thus incenft : Let him go, Gertrude. Speak man. Laer. Where is my father . King. Dead. >ueen. But not by him. King. Let him demand his si1. Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with. To hell, allegiance! vows, to the black devill Conscience and grace, to the profoundefP pit ; I dare damnation; to this point I stand, That both the worlds 1 give to negligence, Let come what comes only I'll be reveng'd Most throughly for my father. King. Who shall stay you? Laer. My will, not all the world's. And for my means, I'll husband them so well, They thall go far with little. King. Good Laertes: If you desire to know the certainty Of your dear father's death, in your revenge, (That sweep-stake,) you will draw both friend and foe, Winner and loser. Laer. None bnt his enemies. King. Will you know them then-? Laer. To his good friends thus wide P'll ope my arms, And like the kind'life-rendring pelican, Repaf them with my blood. Knrag,
King. Why now you speak . , Like a good child, and .a true gentleman. That I am guiltless of;your father's death, And am most sensibly in grief for it, :It shall as level to y.iitjudgment pierce, As day.does to your eye. [A Noise withiln. S C NEE VII. Enter Ophelia fantaflically dreft with fraws and flowers. Laer. Let her come in. How now.? what noise is that? 0 heat dry up my brains, tears seven -rimes salt IBurn on the sense and vertue of mine eye. By heav'n, thy madneflthall be paid with weight, 'Till our scale turn the beam. 0 rose of May!/ Dear maid, kind lifter, sweet Ophelia/ *0 heav'ns, is't poflible a young maid's wits Should be as mortal as an old man's life ? c Nature is fine in love, and where ltis fine, It sends some precious instance of it seif After the thing it loves. Oph." 7hey bore him bare-fac'd on the bier, And on his grave rains many a tear, Fare you well, my dove. Laer. Hadfl thou thy wits, and didfl perfwade revenge, it could not move thus. Oph. You must sing, down a-down, and you call him a-down- a. 0 how the wheel becomes it? it is the false fleward that itole his marter's daughter. .: . - . ' ' kLaer. . Or, perhaps, Nature is fire in love, and wbhere tis fire It sends some precious incense of it self A fter the thing it loves.
Laer. This nothing's more than matter. Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance; pray love remember; and there's pancies, that's for thoughts. Laer. A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted. Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines; there's rue for you, and here's rome for me. We may call it herb of grace a Sundays: you may wear your rue with a difference. There's a dafie; I would give you some violets, but they withered all when my father dy'd: they fay, he made a good end; For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy. Laer. Thought, and affli6ion, passion, hell it self, She turns to favour, and to prettiness. Oph. And will he not come again ? And will he not come again? No, no, he is dead, go to thy death-bed, He never will come again. His beard as white as snow, All flaxen was his pole : He is gone, he ir gone, and we carft away mone, Gramercy on his fuM. And of all christian fouls! God b'w'ye. Laer. Do you fee this, you Gods? King. Laertes, I muff commune with your gri Or you deny me right: go but a-part, Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me If by direc or by collateral hand They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give, Our crown, our lift, and all that we call onfi To you in fatisfa&ion. But if not, Be you oontent to lend your patience to us, VOL. VI. Kkk [Exit Ophelia. ief, And
And we shall jointly labour with your foul, To give it due content. Laer. Let this be so. His means of death, his obscure funeral; No trophy sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones, No noble rite, nor formal oltentation; Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heav'n to earth, That I muLt call in question. King. So you thall: And where th' offence is, let the great ax fall. I pray you go with me. [Exeunt. S CENE VIII. Enter Horatio, with an attendant. Hor. H " 7 H AT are they that would speak with me? VV Ser. Sailors, Sir,they fay they have letters for you. Nor. Let them come in. I do not know from what part of the world I should be greeted, if not from lord Hamlet. Enter Sailors. Sail. God bless you, Sir. Hor. Let him bless thee too. Sail He shall, Sir, an't please him. There's a letter foryou, Sir: It comes from th' ambassador that was bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is. Hor. reads the letter. H OR A T I O, vhen thou Ihalt have overlook'd this, give these fellows some means to the King: they have letters for him. "Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appoint- ment
ment gave us chace. Finding our/elves tooJlow of/fail, we put on a comnpelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded them: on the in- ftant they got clear of our Jhip, so I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me, like thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much haste as thou wouldefi fly death. I have words to speak in thy ear, will make thee dumb, yet are they much too light for the matter. These .good fellows will bring thee where I am. Rofincroffe and Guil- denfitern hold their course for England. Of them I have much to tell thee, farewel. [He that thou knoweft thine, Hamlet. Come, I will make you way for these your letters, And do'c the speedier, that you may diret me To him, from whom you brought them. [Exeunt. SCENE IX. Enter King and Laertes. King. O W muf your conscience my acquittance real, And you must put me in your heart for friend, Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, That he which hath your noble father slain, Pursued my life. Laer. It well appears. But tell me, Why you proceeded not against there feats, So crimeful and so capital in nature, As by your safety, wisdom, all things else, You mainly were ftirr'd up ? King. Two special reasons, Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unfinew'd, And yet to me are strong. The Queen, his mother, K k k z Lives --~--
Lives almost by his looks; and for my felts, My virtue or my plague, be't either which, She's so conjuntive to my life and foul ; That as the star moves not bat in his sphere, I could not but by her. The other motive, Why to a publick count I might not go, Is the great love the general gender hear him; Who dipping all his faults in their affedtion, Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone, Convert his gyves to graces. So my arrows Too slightly timbred for so loud a wind, Would have reverted to my bow again, And not where I had aim'd them. Laer. And so have I a noble father loft, A fifer driven into desperate terms, Whole worth, if praises may go back again, Stood challenger on mount of all the age For her perfetions -- But revenge will come. King. Break not your sleeps for that, you mul not think That we are made of ftuff so flat and dull, That we can let our beard be shook with danger, And think it paflime. You (hall soon hear more. I lov'd your father, and we love your self, And that I hope will teach you to imagine----- Enter MeJf enger. MIes. These to your Majefly: this to the Queen. King. From Hamlet? who brought them ? Mef. Sailors, my lord, they fay, I saw them not: They were giv'n me by Claudio he receiv'd them. King. Laertes, you shall hear them:, leave us, all--- [Exit AMes High and mighty, you Jhall know I am set naked on your king- dom. To-morrowfJhall I beg leave to fee your kingly eyes. When I J7all, first asking you pardon thereunto, recount th' occasion of my sudden return. Hamlet. What
What (hould this mean ? are all the reft come back ? Or is it fiome abuse--. and no fcnh thing ? Laer. Know you the hand? King. 'Tis Hamlet's chara<ter; Naked, and (in a postscript here, he says) Alone: can you advise me ? Laer. I'm loft in it, my lord; bat let him come, It warms the very sickness in my heart, That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, Thus diddefc thou. King. If it be so, Laertes, As how should it be so ? ---. how otherwise ? ---- Will you be rul'd by me? Laer. I, so you'll not o'er-rule me to a peace. King. To thine own peace: if he be now return'd, As liking not his voyage, and that he means No more to undertake it; I will work him To an exploit now ripe in my devise, Under the which he shall not chufe but fall: And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe, But ev'n his mother shall uncharge the pradice, And call it accident. Laer. I will be rul'd, The rather if you could devifei it so That I might be the instrument. King. It falls right: You have been talkt of since your travel much, And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality Wherein they fay you rhine; your fum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him, As did that one, and that in my regard Of the unworthieft siege. Laer. What part is that, my lord? King. A very feather in the cap of youth, Yet
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes The light and carelelfslivery that it wears, Than fettled age his fables, and his weeds, Importing health and graveness. Two months since Here was a gentleman of Normandy; I've seen my seif and ferv'd against the French, And they can well on horse-back; but this gallant Had witchcraft in't, he grew unto his feat; And to such wondrous doing brought his horse, As he had been iocorps'd and demy-natur'd With the brave beast; so far he past my thought, That I in forgery of shapes and tricks, Come short of what he did. Laer. A Norman was't? King. A Norman. Laer. Upon my life, Lamond. King. The very fame. Laer. I know him well, he is the brooch indeed, And gem of all the nation. King. He made confefion of you, And gave you fuich a maflerly report, For art and exercise in your defence; And for your rapier most especial, That he cry'd out, 'twould be a fight indeed, If one could match you. This report of his Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy, That he could nothing do, but wish and beg Your sudden coming o'er to play with him. Now out of this --. Laer. What out of this, my lord? King. Laertes, was your father dear to you ? Or are you like the painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart? Laer. Why ask you this ? King.
King. Not that I think you did not love your father, But that I know love is begun by time; And that I fee in passages of proof, Time qualifies the spark and fire of it: There lives within the very flame of love A kind of wick or fnuff that will abate it, And nothing is at a like goodness still; For goodness growing to a pleurifie, Dies in his own too much ; What we would do, We ihould do when we would; for this would changes, And hath abatements and delays as many As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents, And then this should is like a fpend-thrift's sigh That hurts by eating; but to th' quick o' th' ulcer--- Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake To (hew your self your father's son indeed, More than in words? Laer. To cut his throat i'th' church. King. No place indeed should murther fanC&uarife; Revenge should have no bounds; but, good Laertes, Will you do this, keep close within your chamber? Hamlet return'd, mhall know you are come home: We'll put on those (hall praise your excellence, And set a double varnish on the fame The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together, And wager on your heads. He being remiss, Most generous, and free from all contriving, Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease, Or with a little fhuffling, you may chufe A sword unbated, and in a pass of pra&ice Requite him for your father. Laer. I will do't; And for the purpose I'll anoint my sword:
I bought an unfl&iof of a mountebank, So mortal, that but dip a knife in it, Where it draws blood, no cataplasm so rare, Colle&ted from all simples that have virtue Under the moon, can save the thing from death, That is but fcratch'd withal; I'll touch my point With this contagion, if I gall him flightty It may be death. King. Let's further think of this, Weigh what convenience both of time and means May fit us to our shape. If this should fail, And that our drift look through our bad performance, 'Twere better not affay'd; therefore this proje& Should have a back, or second, that might hold, If this should blast in proof. Soft--let me fee--. We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings, I ha't --- when in your motion you are hot, And make your bouts more violent to th' end, And that he calls for drink; I'll have prepar'd him A chalice for the nonce; whereon but tipping, If he by chance escape your venom'd tuck, Our purpose may hold there. How now, sweet Queen? SCENE X. Enter jueen. Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel, So fast they follow: your fifter's drown'd, Laertes. Laer. Drown'd! oh where? e)een. There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That (hews his hoar leaves in the glafie ifream: There with fantaftick garlands did (he come, Of crow-flow'rs, nettles, daisies, and long purples That
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead mens fingers call them. There on the pendant boughs, her coronet weeds Clambring to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and her felif Fell in the weeping brook; her cloaths spread wide, And mermaid-like, a while they bore her up; Which time she chaunted foatches of old tunes, As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native, and indewed Unto that element: but long it could not be, 'Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death. Laer. Alas then, the is drpwn'd! Queen. Drown'd, drown'd. Laer. Too much of water haft thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet It is our trick, nature her cuffom holds, Lee shame fay what it will; when these are gone, The woman will be out: adieu, my lord, I have a speech of fire that fain would blaze, But that this folly drowns it. King. Follow, Gertrude: How much I had to do to calm his rage. Now fear I, this will give it flart again, Therefore let's follow. [Exit. [Exeunt_ VOL. VI. LII ACT
ACT V. S CENE I. A CHURCH. Enter two downs, with spades and ma-ctoks. i CLOWN. S S she to be buried in chriflian burial, that willfully seeks hegr own salvation ? i Ii Clown. I tell thee, (he is; therefore make her grave straight, the crowner hath fate on her, and finds it christian burial. i Clown. How can that be, unless fthle drown- ed her self in her own defence.~ z Clown. Why 'tis found so. SClown. It must be offendendo, it cannot be else. For here lyes the point; if I drown my felfwittingly, it argues an a6t, and an act hath three branches. It is an act to do, and to perform; argal, (he drown'd her seif wittingly. ^ Clown. Nay, but hear you, goodman Deltver. i Clown. Give me leave; here lyes the water, good: here stands the man, good: if theman go to this water, and drown himself; it is will he, nill he, he goes; mark you that: but if the water come to him, and drown him; he drowns not himfelfl Argal, he that is not guilty of his own death, shortens not his own life. 2 Clown. But is this law . s Clown. Ay marry is't, crowner's quefi law. 2 Clown. Will you ha' the troth on't? if this had not been a gentlewoman, the fbould have been buried out of christian burial. i Clown.
jd Clowin. Wby shxbe thsw fay'L1. Afid z' 'Pmre pity that great folk nould have countenance in this world to drowtor he g themselves, more than other chrifitians. Come, my spade; there is no ancient gentlemen but gardeners, ditchers and grave-ma- kers; they hold up Adanm's profeflion. z Clown. Was he a gentleman ? i Clown. He was the firfc tchat ever 'bore arms. z2 Clown. Wiy, he had none. i Clown. Whar, art a 1esthe. ? aoww ptA htin h clerfltad the scripture ? the scripture says, Adam digg'd; cokld he dig with- out .arms 1~Ill put another question to thee; if tlox" ifwer~ef me not to the purpose, confess thy felf-'-- z Clown. Go to. i Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the ma- son, the flhip-wright, or the carpenter? z Clown. The gallows-maker, for that frame out-lives a thou- sand tenants. I Clown. I like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows does well; but how does it well ? it does well to those that do ill: now thou 'doft ill to fay the gallows is built fronger than the church; argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come.o z Clown. Who builds stronger than a mason, a fiipwrighc, or a carpenter ? -- i Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke. z. Clown. Marry, now I can tell. i Clown. To't. 2 Clown. Mats, I cannot tell. Enter Hamlet and Horatio at a distance. i Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it; for your dull als will not mend his pace with beating i and when you are ask'd this queftiion next, fay a grave-maker. The houses he makes, L l z lafit
las 'till dooms-day: go, get thee to Youghan, fetch me a floup of liquor. [Exit z Clown. He digs and sings. In youth when I did love, did love, Mlethought it was very sweet; To contrat oh the time for a my behove, Oh methought there was nothing meet. Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at grave-making ? Hor. Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness. Ham. 'Tis e'en so; the hand of little imployment hath the daintier fenfre. Clown sings. But age with his sealing fJeps, Hath claw'd me in his clutch: And hath shipped me into the land, As if I ne'er had been such. Ham. That scull had a tongue in it, and could sing once; how the knave jowles it to the ground, as if it were Cain's jaw- bone, that did the firfl murther! this might be the pace of a po- litician which this ass o'er-offices; one that could circumvent God, might it not? Hor. It might, my lord. Ham Or of a courtier, which could fay, good-morrow sweet lord; how dost thou, good lord ? this might be my lord such a one, that prais'd my lord such a ones horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not? Hor.. Ay, my lord. Ham. Why e'en so: and now my lady VWorm's, choplefs, and knockt about the mazzard with a fexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, if we had the trick to fee't. Did these bones cost no more
more the breeding, but to play at loggers with 'em mine ake to think on't. Clown sings. A pick-axe and a spade, a spade, For and, a fhrovwdng feet / O, a pit of clay, for ,to be made For such a guefj is meet. Ham. There's another: why may not that be the scull of a lawyer? where be his quiddits now? his quillets his cafes? his tenures, and his tricks? why does he fuffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty ihovel, and will not tell him of his ation of battery? hum! this fellow might be in's time a great buyer of land, with his flatutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures ? the very conveyances of his lands will hardly lye in this box; and mufl the inheritor himfelfhave no more? ha? Hor. Not a jot more, my lord. Ham. Is not parchment made of fheep-skins? Hor. Ay my lord, and ofcalve-skins too. Ham. They are sheep and calves that seek out assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow: Whole grave's this, sirrah ? Clown. Mine, Sir--. O, a pit of clay for to be made, For such a ghof is meet. Ham. I think it be thine indeed: for thou lief in't. Clown. You lie out on't, Sir, and therefore it is not yours; for my part I do not lie in't, yet it is mine. Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in't, and fay'tis thine; 'tis for the .,
te dead, Clown. Ham. Clown. Ham. Clown. Ham. Clown. nox for the qasidk, tberdore thou Iy'ft,: 'Tis a quick lie, Sir, 'twill away again fro.jn aie wo.y'c. What man doflt thou dig it for? For no man, Sir. What woman -then ? For none neither. Who is to be 'buried int : , One that was a woman, Sir; but relt her foul, fhe's Aad. Ham. How ab'otute the kave is e ,we mrt :speak by the .card, or cq iuvoaaio? will folow us. By the lord, Horatio, these zhree years I *aae takea aote :of it, jhe age is grown so pioked, tbat Ah toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of our courtier, he galls his kibe. How ,long has .cho.u been a grave-maker ? Clwn. Of al the days i'bh' year, J came to't that day that our Jaft King -amlet o'Qrcame Fartin'bas, M-am. How long is that since ? "Clawn. Cannot you tell :that? every fol can tell that: it .was ethat -very day that youog Hamlet was born, he that was mnad, and sent into England. Ham. Ay marry, why was he sent into England? Clown. Why, because he was mad; hie shall recover his wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there. Ham. Why? Clown. 'Twill not be seen in him, there the men are as mad as he. Ham. How came he mad ? Clown. Very firangely, they fay. Ham. How firangely ? Clown. Faith e'en with losing his wits. Ham. Upon what ground . Clown. Why, here in Denmark. I have been lexton here, ;jnan <and boy, thirty years. -Ham.
Ham. How long will a man lie i'th' earth ere lie rot? Clown. I'faith, if he be not rotten before he die, (as we have many pocky coarfes now-a-days, that will scarce hold the laying in) he will last you fomte eight year, or nine year; a tanner will last you nine years. Ham. Why he, more than another? Clown. Why Sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while. And your water is a fore -de- cayer of your whorfon dead body. Here's a (cutl now has lain in the earth three and twenty years. Ham. Whose was it> Clown. A whorfon mad fellow's it was; whose do you thinks it was ? Ham. Nay, I know not. Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue, he potur'd a fla- gon of rhenish on my head once. This Ifame scull, Sir, was Th- rick's scull, the King's jeflter. Ham. This? Clozwn. E'en that. Ham. Alas poor Tor'ek. I knew him, Horatio, a fellow of in- finite jeff; of most excellent fancy: he hath born me on his back a thousand times: and now how abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge riles at it. Here hung those lips that I have kifs'd 1 know not how oft. Where be your gibes now ? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to set the table in a roar ? not one now, to mock your own grinning? quite chop-fallen? now get youto my lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favour she muff come; make her laugh at that----.Pr'ythee, IHoratio, tell me one thing. Hor. What's that, my lord? Ham. Doff thou think A4exander !ookd. o' fthis fashion i'th' earth ? Hor. E'en so. Har,.
Ham. And smelt so, uh? [ Smelling to the Scull. Hor. E'en so, my lord. Ham.- To what bare uses we may return, Horatio! why may not imagination trace the noble duff of Alexander, 'till he find it flopping a bung-hole ? Hor. 'Twere to confider too curiously, to confider so. Ham. No faith, not a jot. But to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: Alexander di- ed, Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth to duff~ the dust is earth ; of earth we make lome, and why of that lome whereto he was converted, might they not flop a beer-barrel ? Imperial Cafar dead and turn'd to clay, Might stop a hole to keep the wind away: Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe, Should patch a wall, t' expel the winter's flaw! But. soft! but soft a while-----here comes the King, SCENE II. Enter King, Queen, Laertes, and a coffin, with Lords and Priefls attendant. The Queen, the courtiers. What is that they follow, And with such maimed rights ? this doth betoken, The coarse they follow did with desperate hand Fore-do its own life; 'twas of faome effate. Couch we a while, and mark. Laer. What ceremony else? Ham. That is Laertes, a most noble youth: mark--- Laer. What ceremony else ? Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd As we have warranty; her death was doubtful, And but that great command o'er-fways the order, She should in ground unfantified have lodg'd 'Till
'Till the las trump. For charitable prayers, Shards, flints, and pebbles, thould be thrown on her; Yet here (he is allow'd her virgin rites, Her maiden ftrewments, and the bringing home Of bell and burial. Laer. Must no more be done? Priest. No more be done: We fihould prophane the service of the dead, To sing a Requiem, and such reft to her As to peace-parted fouls. Laer. Lay her i'th' earth, And from her fair and unpolluted flesh May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest, A miniRfring angel shall my sifter be, When thou lief howling. Ham. What, the fair Ophelia! Queen. Sweets to the sweet, farewel! I hop'd thou would'ft have been my Hamlet's wife; I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid, And not have ftrew'd thy grave. Laer. 0 treble woe Fall tentimes treble on that cursed head, Whole wicked deed thy mofl ingenious sense Depriv'd thee of. Hold off the earth a while, 'Till I have caught her once more in my arms, [Laertes leaps into the grave. Now pile your duaf upon the quick and dead, 'Till of this flat a mountain you have made, T' o'er-top old Pelion, or the skyifh head Of blue Olympus. Ham. [d'fcovering himself.] What is he, whose griefs Bear such an emphasis ? whose phrase of sorrow - Conjures the wandring stars, and makes them stand V o L. VI. M m m Like
Like wonder-wounded hearers ? this is I, [Hamlet lekaps into the grave; Hamlet the Dane. Laer. The devil take thy foul! [Grap Ham. Thou pray'ft not well. I pr'ythee take thy fingers from my throat-.-- For though I am not fplenative and rash, Yet have I in me fomethihg dangerous, Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand King. Pluck them asunder---. .Queen. Hamlet, Hamlet---- Hor. Good my lord be quiet. [The attena Ham. Why, I will fight with him upon this ti Until my eye-lids will no longer wag. Queen. Oh my son t what theme ? Ham. 1 lov'd Ophelia; forty thousand brothers Could not with all their quantity of love Make up my fum. What wilt thou do for her ? King. 0 he ismad, Laertes. ,ueen. For love of God forbear him. Ham. Come (hew me what thou'lt do. Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast ? woo't tear t Woo't drink up Efill, eat a crocodile . I'll do't. Do'ff thou come hither but to whine; To out-face me with leaping in her grave? Be buried quick with her i and so will I; And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, 'till our ground Sindging his pate againfi the burning zone, Make Offa like a wart ! nay, an thou'It mouth, I'll rant as well as thou, King. This is mere madness; And thus a while the fit wilt work on him : pling with him. tants part t~bem' Leme, ;hy self? Anon
Anon as patient as the female dove, When that her golden cuplets are difclos'd, His silence will fit drooping. Ham. Hear you Sir-- What is the reason that you ule me thus ? Ilov'd you ever;i but it is no matter--. Let Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew, and dog will have his day. King. I pray you good Horatio, wait upon him. Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech. We'll put the matter to the present push. Good Gertrude set some watch over your son. This grave shall have a living monument. An hour of quiet (hortly shall we fee; 'Till then, in patience our proceeding be. [Exit. [Exit Hor. [To Laertes. [Exeunt. S C E N E III. A HALL. Enter Hamlet and Horatio. Ham. C 0 much for this, now nhall you fee the other. 3 You do remember all the circumstance. Hor. Remember it, my lord? Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting, That would not let me sleep; methotght I lay Worse than the mutineers in bilboes; raflnmefs (And prais'd be rashness for it) lets us know Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well, When our deep plots do fail; and that should teach us, There's a divinity that (hapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will. M mm z2 -or. _ _~_~_C_ _II ___
Htr. That is most certain. Ham. Up from my cabin, My fea-gown fcarft about me, in the dark Grop'd I to find out them; had my desire, 'Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again, making so bold (My fears forgetting manners) to unseal Their grand commission, where I found, Horatio, A royal knavery; an exa& command, Larded with many several forts ofreafons, Importing Denmark's health, and England's too, (With ho! such buggs and goblings in my life,) That on the fupervize, no leisure bated, No not to fRay the grinding of the ax, My head should be struck off. 1Hor. Is' possible? Ham. Here's the commission, read it at more leiure; But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed Y Hlor. I beseech you. Ham. Being thus benetted roundwith villains, Ere I could make a prologue to my brains, They had begun the play. I fate me down, Devis'd a new commiflion, wrote it fair: (I once did hold it as our ftatifRs do, A baseness to write fair; and labour'd much How to forget that learning; but, Sir, now It did me yeoman's fervicei) wilt thou know Th' effet of what I wrote ~ JHor. Ay, good my lord. Ham. An earnest conjuration from the King, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourifih, As peace should still her wheaten garland wear, And
And stand a comma 'tween their amities, And many such like As's of great charge; That on the view and knowing these contents, Without debatement further, more or lefts, He should the bearers put to fuidden death, No thriving time allow'd. Hor. How was this-.feald . Ham. Why ev'n in that was heaven ordinate;. I had my father's signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danhi feal:; I folded the writ up in form of th' other, Subfcrib'd it, gave th' impreflfion, plac'd it safely; The change was never known: now, the next day. Was our [ea-fight, and what to this was sequent, Thou know'ft already. Hor. So, Guildenfiern and 'Roftncrqoffe go to't. Ham. They are not near my conscience; their defeat Doth by their own insinuation grow: 'Tis dangerous when baser nature comes Between the pas, and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites. Hor. Why, what a King is this? SHam. Does it not, think'ft thou, fiand me now upon ? He that hath kill'd my King, and whor'd my mother, Popt in between th' ele&ion and my hopes, Thrown out his angle for my proper life, And with such cozenage; is'c not perse& conscience, To qudt him with this arm? and is't not to be damn'd, To let this canker of our nature come In further evil? Hor. It murt be shortly known to him from England, What is the ifflue of the business there. Ham. It will be thort. 2 The
The Interim's mine, and a man's lifes ao more Than to fay, one. But I am very sorry, good Horatia, That to Laertes I forgot my fhlf; For by the image of my ~aufe I fee The pourtraiture of his.; I'll court his favoUrs: But fare the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towring paffi. Hor. Peace, who comes bhre . SCENE IV. Enter Ofrick. Ofr. Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark. Ham. I humbly thank you, Sir. Doll know this water-fly ? Hor. No, my good lord. Ham. Thy stare is. the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to know him: he hath much land, and fertile; let abeaf(belord ofbeafts, and his crib shall stand at the King's mefiTe; 'tis a chough; hut as I fay, spacious in the poffelion of dir.e, Oft. Sweet lord, if your a lordship were at leifiure, I (hould im- part a thing to you from his majesty. Ham. I will receive it with all diligence of spirit; put- you bonnet to his right use, 'tis for the head. 0fr. I thank your lordfhlip, 'tis very hot. Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold, the wind is northerly. Oft. It is iiidifferent cold, my lord, indeed. Ham. Metfhinks it is very sultry, and hot for my complexion. Oft. Exceedingly, my lord, it is very sultry, as 'twere, I can- not tell how:-- My lord, his majeflty bid me fignifie to you, that he has laid a great wager on your head: Sir, this is the matter --- Ham. I beseech you remember---- Ofr. Nay in good faith, for mine ease in good faith: Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at his weapon. HJam. a frendfhip.
Ham. What's his weapon? Of./ Rapier and dagger. Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well. Ofr. The King, Sir, has wag'd with him fix Barbary horfet; against the which he impon'd, as I take it, fix French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, or so: three of the carriages in faith are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit. Ham. What call. you the carriages ? Ofr. The carriages, Sir, are the hangers. Ham. Thephrafe would be more germane to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides; i would it might be hangers 'till then. But on; fix Barbary horses, against fix French swords, their afligns, and three liberal-conceited carriages, that's the French bett against the Damn/Fh; why is this impon'd, as you call it? Ofr. The King, Sir, hath laid, that in a dozen passes between you and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate tryal, if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer, Ham. How if I answer no? Oftr. I mean, my lord, the oppofirion of your person in cryal. Ham. Sir, I will. walk here in the hall; if it pleaft his majeflty, 'tis the breathing time of day with me ; let the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the King holdhis purpose ; I will win for him if Lcan: if not, I'll gain nothing bur my ihame, and the odd hits. Ofr. Shall I deliver you so? Ham. To this effel, Sir, after what flotlrifih your nature will. Ofr. I commend my duty to your lordship. [Exit. Ham. Yours, yours; he does eiell ro commrend it himfeif, there are no tongues else for's turn. Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head. Ham. He didfo with his dug before he fuck'd it: thius has he (and many more of the fame breed that I kfowf the drofly age dotes
.dotes on) only got the tune of the time, and outward habit of en- counter, a kind of yefty colletion, which carries them through and through the mos[ fond: and winnowed opinions,, and..do but blo.w them to their tryals, the bubbles are out.: .?Enter a Lord. Lord. My lord, hisj majesty commended bikh to you by young Ofrick, who brings'back to him, ,that you attend haim in thehallp, he sends to know -if your pleafiute. hold to.play with Laeres, or that you will take longer time , Ham. .1 am constant to my purposes, they follow the King's pleasure; ifhis finefs-fpeaks, inine:is ready, now or whensoever, provided.Ibe so able as ,naow, ?Lord. The King and Queen and all are coming down. SHam. In happy time. ,Lord. The Queen desires yIto utfe some gentle entertainment to Laertes, before you fall to play. Ham. She well inftru&s me. "Hor. You will lore this wager, my lord. Ham. I do not think ibf since he went into, France, I have been in continual pra&ice; I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill all's here about my heart--but it is no matter. I-or. Nay, good my lord. Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of game-giving as would perhaps trouble a woman. Hor. If your mind dislike any thing, obey,it. I will forefital their repair hither, and fay you are notCfit. Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury there'sfpecial providencein the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis notto come; if it be not to come, it will be now: ifit be not now, yet itwill come: therea- .dinefs is all. Since no man has ought of what he leaves, what its' .to leave betimes ? - SC E NE
SCENE V. Enter King, qyueen, Laertes andlords, with other attendants with foils, and gantlets. A table, and flagons of wine on it. King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me. Ham. Give me bur pardon, Sir, I've done you wrong, But pardon't, as you are a gentleman. This presence knows, and you must needs have heard How I am punished with fore diftration. What I have done That might your nature, honour, and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness: Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes ? never Hamlet. If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away, And when he's not himself, do's wrong Laertes; Then Hamlet do's it not; Hamlet denies it: Who does it then ? his madness. If't be so, Hamlet is of the fa&ion that is wrong'd, His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy. Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil, Free me so far in your most generous thonughts, That I have shot mine arrow o'er the house, And hurt my b brother. Laer. I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive, in this cafe, should stir me molt To my revenge: but in my terms of honour, I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement; 'Till by some elder masters of known honour I have a voice, and president of peace To keep my name ungor'd. But 'rill that time, I do receive your offer'd love like love, And will not wrong it. V o L.VI. N n n Ham. b mother.
Ham. I embrace it freely, And will this brother's wager frankly play. Give us the foils: Laer. Come one for me. Ham. I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance Your skill shall dlike a star i'th' .dtkeft night Stick firy off, indeed. Laer. You mock me, Sir. Ham. No, by this hand. King. Give them the foils, yoiung Ofrik. Hamlet, you know the wager. Ham. Well, my lord, Your grace hath laid the odds o'th' weaker fide. King. I do not fear it, I have seen yop .both: But since he's better'd, we hae therefore Podds. Laer. This is too $havy, let me fee inQfter, Ham. This likes me well; these fails have all aJlengtli. [Prepares to play. Ofr. Ay, my good lor4. King. Set me the stoops of wine .upon that table: If Hamlet give the first, "ox fc~nd hit, Or quit in answer of the ,hird exchange, Let all the battlemens their r.dance fire. The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breati, And in the cup anc Onyx shall he thrjow, Richer than that which four successive Kings In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups% And let the kettle to the trumpets speak, The trumpets to the ecanoneer without, The cannons to the heav'ns, the heav'ns to earth. Now the King drinks to HaIlet. Come, begin, And you the Judges bear a wary eye. Ham. Come on, Sir. Laero C uiuon,
Laer. Come, my lord. [iTbey, Hlam. One--. Laer. No---. Ham. Judgment. /Ofr. A hit, a very palpable hit. Laer. Well--- again-'--- King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thihe, Here's to thy health. Give him the cup. [Trumpet foand, Shot go. Ham. I'll play this bout first, set it by a while. [They Come --- another hit ---- what fay yop? Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confess. King. Our son shall win. queen. He's fat, and scant of breath. Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows, The Queen caroufes to thy fortune, Hamlet. Ham. Good madam--- King. Gertrude, do not drink. Queen. I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me. King. It is the poifon'd cup, it is too late. [ Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam, by and by. Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face. Laer. I'll hit him now. King. I do not think't. Laer. And yet it is almost against my conscience. [a Ham. Come, for the third, Laertes, you but dally, I pray you pass with your bes violence, I am afraid you make a wanton of me. Laer. Say you fob ? come on. [1 Ofr. Nothing neither way. Laer. Have at you now. [Laertes wounds Hamlet, then in 2fcuffling they change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes, Nnnza K play. * i jday. ,/de. V/ay. 'wg.
* King. Part them, they are incens'd. :l'am. Nay, come again--. Ofr. Look to the Queen there, ho HaO. They bleed on both ides. How is'r, my lord ? Ofr. How is'c Laertes? Laer. Why, as a woodcock to my own fprindge, Ofrick, I'm jufily kill'd with mine-own treachery. Ham. How does the.Queen ? King. She swoons to fee them bleed. >ueen. No, no, the drink,; the drink-- Oh my dear Hamlet, the drink, the drink,-- I am poifon'd--. [ueet Ham. Oh villany! hoe! let the door be lock'd: Treachery! seek it out ---- Laer. It is here. Hamlet, thou art slain, No medicine in the world can do hee good. In thee there is not half an hour of life; The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom'd: the foul pradice Hath turn'd it self on me. Lo, here I lye, Never to rife again;, thy mother's poifon'd;. I can no more ----the King, the King's to blame. Ham. The point envenom'd too? Then venom to thy work. [Stabs the , All. Treason, treason. King. 0 yet defend me, friends, I am but hurt. Ham.. Here thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane, Drink off this potion: is d the onyx here ? Follow my mother. [King Laer. He is justly ferv'd. It is a poison temper'd by himself. Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet; Mine 4 the uniof. ? dies. King. di es.
Mine and my father's death:come not upon theeJ :" . : Nor thine on me! . ," - . t [Des. Ham. Heav'n make thee free ofSiti rI';:1ow thee., I'm dead,- Horatio ;wretched Orueer, adieu,! ' You that look pale, and tremble at this chance, That are but mautes or: audience:to-this a&., Had I but time, (as this fell serjeant death di . Is fltri& in his arrest) oh I could telLyaPu-s . . .. , < But let it be--. Horatio, I am dead, . Thou liv'ft, report me and my :caaufe aright To the unsatisfied. , .. ... ; Hor. Never believe it. I'm more an antique Roman than a Dane; Here's yet rome liquor left. Ham. As th' art a manu Give me the cup ; let go, by 0heav'n I'll have'r. Oh good Horatio, whata wounded name, Things ifanding thus unknown, shall live behind me? If thou didft ever hold me in thy heart, Absent thee from felicity a while, And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain, To tell my tale. IMarch afar off, and Ihout within. What warlike noise is this ? SCENE VI. Enter Oifrick. Ofr. Young Fortinbrafs, with conquest come from Poland, To the ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley, Ham. 0, I die, Horatio: The potent poison quite o'er-grows my spirit, I cannot live to hear the news from England. lBut
But I do prophefie th' ekahmn lighis Oa Fortinbras, he has my dying voice, So tell him, with th' occurretits more or lefli Which have solicited. --- The reft is silence, Hor. Now cracks a noble heart; good-nighft And flights of angels sing thaee to thBy reft! Why do's the drum come hither? Enter Fortinbras andEnglif Ambafador, Wits and attendants. [Dki. fwLeet priice; drum, colours, Fort. Where is this fight? Hor. What is it you would fee? If ought of woe or wonder, cease your feapch6 Fort. This quarry cries on havock. Oh procd, death ! What feaff is tow'rd in thine eternal ceil, That thou so many princes at a fhoc So bloodily halft struck ? /amb. The fight is dismal, And our affairs from England come too late: The ears are senseless that should, give us hearing To tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd, That Rolincroff'e and Guildenflern are dead: Where should we have our thanks ? Hor. Not from his mouth, Had it th' ability of life to thank you: He never gave command'ment for their death. But since so full upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England Are here arrriv'd; give order tha t efelbodies High on a ifage be placed to the view, -: And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world, How these things came about. So shalt yot.hear Of cruel, bloody, and unnatural: as, Of
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning, and forc'd cause, And in this upshot, purposes mistook, Fall'n on rh' inventors heads. All this can I Truly deliver. Fort. Let us hafle to hear it, And call the noblest to the audience. For me, with sorrow, I embrace my fortune, I have some rights of mempry in this kingdom, Which now to claim, my vantage doth invite me. Hor. Of that I shall have also cause to speak, And from his mouth whole voice will draw no more: But let this fame be presently perform'd, Ev'n while men minds are wild, left more mischance On plots and errors happen. Fort. Let four captains Bear Hamlet like a soldier off the stage, For he was likely, had he been put on, To have prov'd most royally. And for his passage, The soldiers mufick, and the rites of war Speak loudly for him-- Take up the body: such a fight as this, Becomes the field, but here (hews much amiss. Go, bid the soldiers (hoot. [Exeunt marching: after which, a peal of ordnance are hot ojf.
2,, ..
OTHELLO, THE MOOR of (F NICE. VOL. VI. Ooo -- II -~---- II- II~C~ --- II-~ _ IP-~PT--~ L ---IIP~-S~I _--- ~--aslb- 0 o o
SDramatis Perfonx. ' > . - " . S. - -. - ., . .. - . , ? :y 9! KE of Venice. Brabantio, a noble Venetian. Gratiano, Brother to Brabantio. Lodovico, Kitf/man to Brabantio and Gratiano. Othello, the Moor, General for the Venetians in Cyprus. Cafio, his Lieutenant-General. Jagp, S6andard-Awarer to Qthello. Roderigo, afBfofbh Gentleman, in love with Defdemona. Montano, the Moor'^s Predecessor in the Government of Cyprus. Clown, Servant to the M2oor. Herald. Defdemona, VDaughter to Brabtioq, and Wlife to Othello. Emilia, Wife to Jago. Bianca, Curtezan, Mistress to Caffilo. Officers, Gentlemen, Me/feengers, Musicians, and Attendants. S C E N E for the Sir/s Acl in Venice; during the reji of the Play in Cyprus. The Story is taken from Cynthio's Novels. OTHELLO,
OTHELLO, the Moor of V E NIC . , * , , =. . - ?~~~ |CIL- ACT I. SCEN E i. VENICE. Enter Rodorigo and Jago. RODORIGO. SV E R teil mie, I take it much ufkinfdly,a SThat thou, Jag, who haftl had my paflf, As if the strings were thine, fhordrlt know of this. I1 ago. But yot'll not hedr me. If ever I did dream of such a matter, abhor me. Rod. Thou told'lt me, thou didfl hold him in thy bare. Jayo. Defpifeme ?IfI do not. Three great ones of the city, In personal suit to make me his lieutenant, Oft' capt to him: and by the faith of man I know my price, I'm worth no worse a place. But he, as loving his oiwn pride and purposes, Evades them with a bumbafl circumrtance, Horribly fRuft with epithets of war And in conclufior, Non-fuits my mediators; Cerres says he, Oooz I a 2ufh, never tell me, I take it much unkindl;---ed. prim.
I have already chorfe. ...... .. J . ) And what was he? Forsooth a great arithmetician, One Michael Cafio, a Florentine, A'fellow almolt damn'd in afair wife3, That never set a squadron in the field, Nor the division of a battel knows More than a spinster; but the bookish theorick, Wherein the tongued consuls can pr0pofe As maflerly as he; meer prattle, without pra&ice, Is all his soldiership---. he. had th' cleaion , And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and, on ;other grounds Chrifiian and heathen, must be led and calm'd By Debitor, and Creditor, this Counter-cafter. He, in good time, mult his lieutenant be, And I, God bless the mark! his Moor-flhip's Anciet. . Rod. By heav'n, I rather would have been his Ihangmanu Jago. But there's no remedy, 'tis the curse of feryice; Preferment goes by letter and affeaion, And not by old gradation, where each second Stood heir to th' firfL Now, Sir, be judge.your flf, If I in any just term am affign'd To love the Moor ? Rod. I would not follow him then. Jago. 0 Sir, content you; I follow him to serve my turn upon him. We cannot all be matters, nor all maiters Cannot be truly follow'd. You shall mark Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave, That, doting on his own obsequious bondage, Wears out his time, much like his mailer's afsT, For nought but provender, and when he's old, cafheir'd; Whip
Whip me such honest knaves ---ts Otheis there dre Who trimm'd in forms and vifages of duty, Keep yet their hearts attending on thuiifLve ^ , , , - And throwing but shows of fervice8ni their 1ords, ' i Well thrive by them; and whetf'they' erli'd their -Wats,l *,i,, Do themselves homage. These folks have omefoul; :, : : And such a one do I profess my fetif. ' " ; It is as sure as you are Rodorfgo, ' . .-.^ - Were I the Moor, I would' riotbe"Jdgi:'': ' :i, -. A .- In following him, I follow butmy self. : ' " ,, Heav'n is my judge, not I,: for love -and duty, .. . '' ,- But seeming so, for my-pecuihar end'- - 1. " ,','- ., i', For when my outward a1:ion doth 'demolaftrate'- ,: :1,- ',,,*^;-: The native at and figure 6Fmy heact' *o': z ( .:,.. ! , r .-, In compliment extern, 'tis not long after ' But I will wear my heart upon 'my sleeve, , , For daws to peck at; l'rnitdthiat b feerw; : ?',: . I Rod. W\Vt' a .full fortune does the :thicktips owe, - ' . . If he can carry her thus? ,' Jago. Call up her father, , , , ,, Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight. , , Proclaim him in the fiPreets, incense her kinfmeri. And tho' he in a fertile climate dwell, Plague him with flies: tho' that his joy be joy, Yet throw fuch' changes of vexation on'tc, As it may lose some colour. Rod. Here is her father's house, I'll call aloud. Jago. Do, with like timorous accent, and direyell, As when, by night and negligence, the fire Is spied in populous cities '- Rod. What ho! Brabantio/ Signior Brabantio. hao! Jago. Awake! what ho! Brabantio ! ho ! thieves, thieves! Lopk to your hou(e, your daughter, and your bags: Thieves! thieves! S CENE b ram c chances.
S CENE IL Enter Brabantio above, at a window. ,Bra. What is the reafn of this terrible summons?, What is the matter there? Rod. Signior, is all your family within? Jago. Are all doors lock'd ? . Bra. Why ? wherefore ask you this? Jago. Zounds! Sir, you~re robb'd: forfhame eput on your gown, Your heart is bura, you have loft half your foul; Ev'n now, ev'n very now, an old btackfran Is tupping your whis.we. Arise, auife. Awake the snorting citizens wih t~i bell, Or else the devil will make a g~a~djire ;of you. Arise I fay. . - Bra. What, have y t:lot yo' waits .? Rod. Most reverend-figuLaor,. do yoa kaw mny voice? Bra. Not I; what are you ? Rod. My name is Rodorigo. Bra. The worse elunme : I've charg'd thee not to haumnt abofut my doors: In honest plainness thou hafl heard me fay,. My daughter's not for thee. And now in madnaefs, Being full of supper and diftempriog draughts, Upon malicious bravery dost thou come To start my quiet. Rod. Sir, Sir, Sir----- Bra. But thou must meeds be fare,, My spirit and my Place have in their power To make this bittesr si t hee. Rod. Patience, good Sir. Bra. What telift thou me of robbing. this is. Ience" My' house is not a grange. Red.
Rod. Most grave Brabafttbi ~', In simple and pure foul, Icomne to you. ' " Jago. Sir, you are one of those that will not serve God, if the devil bid you. Becanfe we c~nie tdd&']yoi service, you think we are ruffians; you'll have yoiar Sdaughter tietirvd'with: a batbary horse, you'll have your nephews neigh tor you, yd'll hiave cour- fers for cousins, and gennets for germans. Bra. What prophane wretch art thaou? Jago. I am one, Sir, that coomes-to'tell you, your daughter and the Moor are now making the beast with two backis. Bra. Thou art a villain: .- Jago. You are a senator. Bra. This thou (halt ariffwer. I know thee, Rodorigo. Rod. Sir, I will answer ahy thing. But i beseech you, 4 IPt be your pleasure and most wife consent, (As partly I find it is,) that your fair daughter, At this odd even and dull warch o'ti9 righbt, Transported with no worse nor better guard,; But with a knave of hire, a Gundalier, To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor: If this be known to you, and your allowance, We then have done you bold and fawcy wrongs. But if you know not this, my manners tell me, We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe That from the sense of all civility I thus would play, and trifle with your reverence. Your daughter, if you have not giv'n her leave, I fay again, hath made a grols revolt, Tying her duty, beauty, wit and fortunes To an extravagant and wheeling stranger, Of here and every where; straight fatisfie your self. If (he be in her chamber, or your house, Let j The 17 following lines are added s/ince the fir]l edition, where after thbe words, I beseech you, immediately follows------lf she be in her chdmber, &c.
Let loose on me the justice of the fta~e;:? " : For thus deludingyou. , :, - Bra.- Strike on the tinder, ho! Give me a taper-- call up all my people, .-- - This accident is not unlike my dream,. Belief of it opprffies.me already. Light, I fay, light? ,! Jago. Farewel; for I mul leave you. It seems not meet, nor wholfome to my place, To be produc'd (as if I flay, I flhall) Against the Moor. For I do know, the slate, However this may gall him with some check, Cannot with safety ca& him. For he's embark'd With such loud reafin to the Cyprus wars, Which ev'n now itand in act, that for their fobuls, Another of his fadom they have none, To lead their business. In which regard, Tho' I do hate him as I do hell's pains, Yet, for necessity of.pirefent life, I mull hew out a flag and sign of love, (Which is indeed but sign.) That you may surely find him, Lead to the Sagittary the railed search; And there will I be with him. So farewel. [Exit. S C E N E II. Enter Brabantio in his night-gown, and servants with torches. Bra. It is too true an evil. Gone she is, And what's to come of my despised time, Is nought but bitterness. Now, Rodorigo, Where didit thou fee her? oh unhappy girl ! With the Moor, faift thou! who would be a father? How didil thou know 'twas she ? oh (he deceives me Pafl
Pafi thought--- What said (be to ybu ? get more tapers--- Raise all my kindred --- are they married, think/.you ? ; Rod. Truly I think they are. Bra. Oh heaven! how gat (he out ? Oh treason of my blood! Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters minds By what you fee them ac. Are there not charms, By which the property of youth and maidhood May be abus'd? have you not read, Rodorigo, Of some such thing? Rod. Yes, Sir, I have indeed. Bra. Call up my brothers; oh would you had had her! Some one way, some another----Do you know Where we may apprehend her, and the Moor ? Rod. I think I can discover him, ifyou please To get good guard, and go along with me. Bra. Pray you lead on. At every house I'll call,. I may command at most; get weapons, hoa! And raise some special officers ofd might: On, good Rodor:go, I'll deserve your pains. [ SCENE IV. The Street. Enter Othello, Jago, and Attendants with torches. /ago. t H 0' in the trade of war I hae slain men, JL Yet do I hold it very fluffo'ch' conscience To do no contriv'd murther: Ic lack iniquity Sometimes to do me service.---- Nine or ten times I thought to've jerk'd him here under the ribs. Oth. It's better as it is. . . .. VOL. VI. Ppp -ih.e rm ae J7ago. _ __ ___ ~_ PO,.t. d nig~~. ed prim. e take.
Jago. Nay, but he prated, And spoke faucb feurvy and provoking terms Against your honour, That with the little godliness I have, I did full hard forbear him. But I pray, Sir, Are you fast married ? fcr be fare of this, That the Magnifico is much.beloved, And hath in his effe& a voice potential As double as the Duke's: he will divorce you, Or put upon you what refltraint or grievance The law (with all his might t' enforce it on) Will give him cable. Oth. Let him do his fpight: My services, which I have done the Signoary, Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know, (Which, when I know that boaeiing is an honoaur, I shall promulgate) I fetch life and being From men of royal siege; and my demerits May speak, unbonneted, to as proud a fortune As this that I have reach'd. For know, Jago, Bu* that I love the gentle Defdemona, I would not my unhoufed free condition Put into circumscription and confine, For the seas worth. But look! what lights come yonder? S CE.N E V. Enter Cafio with torches. Jago. Those are the raised father, and his friends: You were best go in. Oth. Not I: I mua be found. My parts, my title, and' my perse& foul ShaL manifest me rightly. Is it they ? Jago.
Jago. By Janus, I think no. Oth. The servants of the duke, and my lieutenant: The goodness of the night upon you, friends, What is the news ? Caf. The duke does greet you, General, And he requires your haste, post-haste appearance, Even on the instant. Oth. What is the matter, think you? Caf. Something from Cyprus, as I may divine: It is a business of some heat. The gallies H-ave sent a dozen sequent messengers This very night, at one anothers heels: And many of the consuls, rais'd and met, Are at the duke's already. You have been hotly call'd for, When being not at your lodging to be found, The senate lent above three several quefis, To search you out. Oth. 'Tis well I am found by you: I will but spend a word here in the house, And go with you. [Exit Othello. Caf. Ancient, what makes he here? Jago. Faith, he to-night hath boarded a land carrac; If it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever. Caf. I do not underfiand. Jago. He's married. Caf. To whom? Jago. Marry to--. Come, captain, will you go? Enter Othello. Oth. Have with you. Caf. Here comes another troop to seek for you. pSCENE Pggz
SCENE VI. Enter Brabantio, Rodorigo, with officers and torches. Jago. It is Brabantio; General be advis'd, He comes to bad intent. Oth. Holla! stand there. Rod. Signior, it is the Moor. Bra. Down with him, thief. [They draw on both sides. Jago. You Rodorgo! come, Sir, I am for you-- Oth. Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust 'em. Good signior, you (hall more command with years, Than with your weapons. Bra. 0 thou foul thief! where hafi thou ffow'd my daughter ? Damn'd as thou art, thou haff enchanted her; For I'll refer me to all things of sense, If (he in chains of magick were not bound, Whether a maid, so tender, fair, and happy, So opposite to marriage, that (he fhunn'd The wealthy curled darlings of our nation, Would ever have, t'incur a general mock, Run from her guardage to the footy bosom Of such a thing as thou, to fear, not to delight ? 4 Judge me the world, if'tis not gross in sense, That thou haft praais'd on her with foul charms, Abus'd her delicate youth, with drugs or minerals, That weaken motion: I'll have't disputed on, 'Tis probable, and palpable tothinking; I therefore apprehend and do attach thee, For an abuser of the world, a praaicer Of arts inhibited and out of warrant; Lay hold upon him; if he do resist Subdue him at his peril. Oth. 4T'he five following lines are not in the firfl edition.
Oth. Hold your hands, Both you of my inclining, and the reff. Were it my cue co fight, I should have known it Without a prompter. Where will you I go To answer this your charge . Bra. To prison, 'till fit time Of law, and course of diret session Call thee to answer. Oth. What if I obey? How may the duke be therewith satisfied, Whose messengers are here about my fide, Upon some present business of the state, To bring me to him. Offi. True, most worthy signior, The duke's in council, and your noble self: I'm sure is sent for. Bra. How! the duke in council? In this time of the night? bring him away; Mine's not an idle cause. The duke himself, Or any of my brothers of the state, Cannot but feel this wrong, as 'twere their own; For if such actions may have passage free, Bond-flaves and pagans shall our statesmen be. SCENE [Exeunt. VII. The Senate house. Duke and Senators, set at a table with lights and attendants. Duke. P' H E R E is no comnpofition in these news, JL That gives them credit. i Sen. Indeed, they're difproportion'd; My _ _ _ ~ __ _._ I 1 ~4~ _
My letters fay, a hundred and seven gallies. Duke. And mine a hundred and forty. z Sen. And mine two hundred; But though they jump not on a jult account, (As in there cafes where they aim reports, 'Tis oft with diff'rence,) yet they all confirm A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus. Duke. Nay, it is possible enough to judgment; I do not so secure me in the error, But the main article I do approve, In fearful sense. Saylor whthin.] What boa! what boa! what hoa! Enter Saylor. Offi. A messenger from the gallies. Duke. Now! --. what's the business ? Sail. The Turki/h preparation makes for Rhodes, So was I bid report here to the state. Duke. How fay you by this change ? i Sen. This cannot be, By no aflfay of reafona. 'Tis a pageant To keep us in false gaze; when we confider, T-i' iimportancy of Cyprus to the Thrk, And let our selves again but understand, That as it more concerns the Tlrk than Rhodes, So may he with more fertile question bear it, ^ For that it ifands not in such warlike brace, But altogether lacks th' abilities That Rhodes is dref&'d in. If we make thought of this, We must not think the Turk is so unskilful, To leave that latefi, which concerns him firfi, Negleting an attempt ofeafe and gain, To wake and wage a danger profitletfs. Duke, SThe 7 follwing lines are added since the firfl edition.
Duke. Nay, in all confidence he't not for Rhbdets. Offi. Here is more news. Enter a Messenger. Mef. The Ottomites, (reverend and graciouj) Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes, Have there injoin'd them with an after fleet--. i Sen. Ay, so I thought; how many, as you gues? Mef. Of thirty. fail ; and now they do re-ftem Their backward course, bearing with friank appearaace Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano% Your trusty and most valiant servitor, With his free duty, recomziends you thus, And prays you to believe hiimn Duke. 'Tis certain then for Cypruss: Marcus Luccicos, is he not in town ? i Sen. He's now in Florence. Duke. Write from us, to him. Post-haste, dispatch. i Sen. Here comes Brabantio, and the valiant Moor. S CENE VIII. To them, enter Brabantio, Othello, Caflio, Jago, Rodorigo, and Ojicers. Duke. Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you, Againf the general enemy Ottoman. I did not fee you; welcome, gentle signior, We lackt your counfcl, and your help to-night. Bra. So did I yours; good your grace pardon me, Neither my place, nor ought I heard of business, Hath rais'd me from my bed; nor doth the general Take hold on me. For my particular grief
Is of so flood-gate aln ibeIn at . .':, That it ingluts and swallows omther orrows, - .. And yet is still it seif. Duke. Why? whact's he matrer? Bra. My daughter! oh my tiiter --',' Sen. Dead. . " . Bra. To m, , "She is abisd t o , tihr'fir i neSd corrupted - By spells and mediies, foubogit'of inmntebanks; For nature so prepoftet'otfty '" "e . (Being not deficient, blind, or lame offefie,) -- - Sans witchcraft could not --- ' :-'' ":'.': '. Duke. Who-e'er he-be, that in:this fotul iproceeding Hath thus beguil'd yotur daughter of her sel-f; ' And you of her, the bloody book of law " : . '. You shall your self read in the bitter letter;, : ,: After your own fenfei; thoug i Our pr6per son- ' , Stood in your at&ion. Bra. Humbly I thank your grace, Here is the man; this Moor, whom now it seems Your special mandate, for the state affairs, 1Hath hither brought. SAll. We're very sorry for'r. Duke. What in your own part can you fay to this? Bra. Nothing, but this is Co. Oth. Most potent, grave and reverend figniors, 'My very noble and approv'd good masters; That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter, It is most true; true, I have married her; The very head and front of my offending : Hath this extent,; no more. Rude amI in my fpeechy And little blefs'd with the soft phrase of peace; 0or since these arms of mine had seven years pith, 'Till '2~".: ,. 'r 1 :r .I ?s r '~ . eL
'Till now, some nine moons wallfted, they have us'd Their dearest adtion in the tented field; And little of this great world can I speak, More than pertains to, feats of broils and battel; And therefore little shall I grace my cause, In speaking for my seif. Yet, by your patience, I will a round unvarnifh'd tale deliver, Of my whole course of love; what drugs, what charms, What conjuration, and what mighty magick, (For such proceeding I am charg'd withal,) I won his daughter with. Bra. A maiden, never bold; Of spirit so still and quiet, that her motion Blufh'd at it seif; and fhlie, in fpighr of nature, Of years, of country, credit, every thing, To fall in love with what she fear'd to look on-- It is a judgment maim'd, and most imperfe&t, That will confess perfection so could err Against all rules of nature, and mult be driven To find out practices of cunning hell, Why this fhouid be. I therefore vouch again, That with Come mixtures powerful o'er the blood, Or with fomne dram, conjur'd to this effe&, He wrought upon her. Duke. To vouch this, is no proof, Without e more certain and more overt tell, Than there thin habits and poor likelyhoods Of modern seeming do prefer against him. x Sen. But, Othello, speak, Did you by indireat and forced courses Subdue and poison this young maid's affe&ions? Or came it by request, and such fair question As foul to foul affordeth? V o L. VI. Q.qq O . ' more wider and more over tej.f
O0t. I befeecb you , . S * ,-; *- . * ^ **- ..? -. Send for the lady to the Sagttary * ; . . And let her speak of me bafori/er fCar.fe, .' ? . . Ifyou do find me foi.4,iw,repo -, ..or ,: ; - r. The trufl, the office, I do"boldhofyoa^  .-- . Not only take away1 bu.M~ et-. s feitz tce Even fall upon my life. , , . Duke. Fetch Defdkmoi ~i . . ,.., . :.. .... . , , , O0r. Ancient, coe th0beJyOU.fruf s lBlw dh0 pae/ - :i I- - cy~6b~ And'till she come, as truly as to heav'n , . I do confess the vices of my blood; y . , .:: , So justly to your grave eas 11 pi atf .. nt, .. How I did thrive in this, fahiiadycslowe, .: y .  ; And (he in mine. Duke. Say itj rs. l .ic, Odx-I* Oth. Her father lovkf 1Wey oft~i-spifvh InW& a.: - Still queftion'd me the flory of nay life - From year to year;-t -ebacelds, sieges, fe.toJe , That I have pafl. : I ran it through, ev't,'from my beyil, dgys . To th' very mome-rac tliahe he bad me tell it. Wherein I spoke of moss dffaftrou. chranes, Of moving accidents by flood and field, Of hair-breadth fcapes i'th' immarinezit deadly br teara Of being taken by the ffoleBnt fe, And fold to slavery; o1f my 'ednmipoti. thence,[ And with it all my trave.ls Miffey. -4 Wherein of t antrtes vast, and f defars- Wiild, Rough quarries, rocks and bilish wbofLe heads touch heav'n, It 4 !'his line is restored froni /iA 6 ^ddLitfi, A i it tir ref^--And pottanie irnmy travels history. Rymer in his criticism on this play has clang'd it to Portents, inflead of Portance. - Antrees. 1c. attfj'toeS. f Defarts idle, in the former edittogs doubtklfs a corruption frodi wilde.
Would ZDedemona .1ioufly inli~e;^s . ', 4 : But f(ill the hopfe-affairs would ..ravjI ichice Which ever as fhie could with.haft^edi~athi,;' ' ; She'd come agaia, ^04 wia ^^.eed ' ,f -- -' .. Devour up my discourse:- which I obferviiig, "' . ' Took once a pliant hour, ,and founo good 4?at s " ; . To draw from her a plyerorf, t-. ' -' That I wc ild all my. . ig.. Iii. ge. dil.e.... " 1i 'o t . Whe2eofbby parcels (he had fomet4ing lheard, But not diftin&ively: Idid(i~b~ft -ftpj " '. .-- .Y ,:, ',: ,. And often did beguile her <of l'h^re'isia " ; *- i -j; "^ : -': s When I did feak ofifome.fi4rtWilrdke "-:: ,) ,, -.<, ' :<i That my youth fuffer'd. . y, yft6~s4yi g cine,. - ' - ^ She gave me for my pains a wofld'cftVighs: - , ' ' She swore in faith, 'twas firange, 'twas paflg'gftaiage" -- 'Twas pitiful, 'twas wo 8drouip'^i 2 -i1." -- r -d i . She wifh'd (he had not headpit'---- :yetii 'i'1 ' " ".":" * " That heav'n had niade he- fudia mad.ii--a4he.(lLvkdn, ,5 " And bad me, if I hbad a (friend that lov'd her, - .. ' I ihould but teach huim iah0ow' tFl myiftb, And that would woo her. On bhis hint I fpafe, She lov'd me for the dangers I thad paif, And I lov'd her, that (he did pity shem: This only is the witchcraft I have us'd. Here comes the lady, let'her- witners it. * It was my hint to speak; ith-wias:tbe pr0ess3 And of the Canibals that each other eat, The Anthropophagi; and men whose heads Do grow beneath their ihiQdters. .Ihe1' Iobhr, . Would Defdemona &c. t It was kisses in the later $ditkns. Beut thi-.is.evidenly tje\ true readisg: t.he ldy ' bad been forward indeed, to give himt a t'woridof Ws~onsQ? .tlke bare recital of his fory, nor does it agree witk the following lines. Qqq SC ENE
, - -, .E Ene D-^1moa 17 .4 K^ Tr'T DuKe. I think this tale would win my daughter'too -*, .. . Good Brabanthoisa * '*'- -ed:m the1 bL - ..... , ,* Take up this- rnaagled nm: aerat the fbe , ... . Men do their brokehancdsz- p::B:t ,,r,.e use , .,; p'.. ah f.e/ Than their bare hands. *-'s iS^ ... ... ... -' * , ~ o , , Bra. I pray you hear iher eakt ; , ; .; : If she confess that she was halthe :wooer, . . ,- r: DeftruAi6nt on'my head, iif y bad.blame. - . , Light on the man. iltu .khTerbe gentle miftref's: . i :, Do you perceive in alllts.noblMe'(6company; /., :, . Where you most owe obedienc .... ^ : . , . ,. : Def. Noble father, d - * p I do perceive here a divided-duitc ' ..,' - ,.. -. , , To you I'm bound &forrlife- and edaieatioti:.' :. .. . , : - ,i My life and edication both do leari me - How to refpe&b you. You're the lord of'duty, . :,, , , i I'm hitherto your daughter. But here's my husband, And so much duty as my mother fhew'd - To you, preferring you before her father; So much I challenge, that I may profets Due to the Moor, my lord. Bra. God be with you: I have done. - Please it your grace, on to the ltate affairs; I had rather to adopt a child than get it. Come hither, Moor: i here do give thee that with all my heart, Which, but thou haft already, with my heart I would keep from thee. For your fake, jewel, I'm glad at foul I have no other child, For
For thy escape would teach me tyranny To hang clogs on thcm. f'ha-dlf., y ljprd. Duke. Let me speak like your felfe; and lay a fentetice, Which, like a grife, or ftep;~hiayrhei, thefelovers Into your-favour=. w...v , ; , , : -,. .,, -,, .,,. .,U When remedies are pafl, the griefs are ended . ..., By feeing the worst, which late j hopes eidended,, .. ,, To mourn a mischief that ips ng ,,. .. . ,, Is the next way to draw-new mifchiefon. .,, \.. , ,, ,,,- What cannot be preferv'd whe3;|fottune takes,.. , , Patience her injury a mockery: ma...s.4 ;, , - , . , The robb'd that fmiles,i,.fteas(foriething from the thief,.-.., He robs himflf, that spends a boie -grief .:.,. . . Bra. So let the Turk.ofyprMs-us-,begaile, . , We lore it not so long as we can smile;,,.:- , . ., , He bears the sentence well, that nothing ble~as., -:,i,:., , But the free comfort which fro ithescwe hears ,. ; , .. . But he hears both the sentence, and the forro,,.,, , .. That to pay grief, muf.of spoor patience boprro.. . There sentences toiagar,. or-togall, , , Being strong on.bothfides, are.equivca . , , But words are words; I never yet did hear, . That the bruiz'd heart was pierced through the ear. I humbly beseech you proceed to thI' affairs of state. Duke. The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus: Othello, the fortitude of.the place is.beft known t0 you. And though we have there a fubftirute of muf allowed fufficiency yet opinion, a more fovereign.miilrefs of effeAs> throws a moioe safe voice on you; you must therefore be content to slubber the g gloss of your new fortunes, with this more faubborn anad loitp- rous expedition, .. .: , Oth. The tyrant cufltorn, most grave senators, Hath made the flinty and fel couch f wr.i .' My g gross. b coacb.
A natural and pmxrrpt mlityr,, I find ir hardseis; and do em rtake ,,. , ,: This present &War ag-aiaft vheilOt. t. .. ... ,; . Most humbly therefore bending to your fltate, ,.. , . I crave fit difpofitiona for o yife :. Due reverene jofj4ac .nd esbithioa, . I . , With such accomnmodat adkip ad:* j, > ,.., , i . v, As levels with her breeding. ..... ... c .... . *:.- , j.' ,-: ,. Duke. Why, ather:fa: hrs.,:.. . h e , - Bra. I will not have it f. , , r , . ,. y: Oth. tNi r I' ,.. ,.?,, ,,, . I - Def. Nor would I there eide,. .,.. , i , To put my father in ispadeaint Ahughfs ) , ., . By being in his eye. Most gracios ,Duke, To my unfolding end wn yurssercis a a, . 4 . . ir And let me find :a, dhavter i: ypr O . ,v , . T'affift my fimpCefi. Duke. What would yon, Defdmona,?. Def. That I did love the Moor to live w~ith hiiiv My down-right violence and. ~rm of fortaw r e^ May trumpet to the world. ~v1y heart's fiibdu'd . Ev'n to the very quatlisy c<fmyIard; I saw Othello's 'vtfage-in iLhis imind, And to *his honoars oid ?his ,alia tpatrts Did I ry *foul and 'fortEnes confeotate. 5o hat, dear 4oQrds, /if3 be :left :bhind A moth of peace, and he go to he war, The -r-iies for which 'I love him airje bfreft me: And ,1 a 'heavy 'intewimfhall ifuipplort By his dear absence. Let me go with him. Oth. Your voices, lords; 'befeech you, let lr -will Have a free way. I therefore beg it not. To * charater.
To please the palate of*mf yppatt; :*- r' ,-i -.:^v Nr to comply with heatAe young afFei- ' 2 In my defunt and lropie fa a-i fU, ^. But to be free and bounteous -v heph ja. au : u : .. And heav'n defend your good fouls~, dtiasopa tHimik I will your serious and great buf'cfs fcamd a .. When she is with me----B o whewiigbh-winQktt -s-y Of feather'd Cupid, k foil ~ditbwtih a dl ct...& fMy teialative and offitd itiamremens That my dilfports corrupt and taint my business; Let housewives make a skillet of my heleRr, And all indign and base adversities Make head against my estimation. Duke. Be it as you hall privately determine, Or for her flay or going; th" aff~ar nerie shae; . And speed must answer. Yoatt'ttlf* l etice tonigft.- Def [ To-night, my lord, tfo-tight?' :- :"j - Oth. With all my heart. Duke. At nine i'th' morninrg herte Wietl meet again. Othello, leave fame officer behind, And he (haIl our coiimnifior bring to yoTu; And fuich things efe of qtrality and refpe& As doth import you. Oth. Please your grace, my Atncieint; (A man he is of honesty anr< traft,) To his conveyance I aflign my wife; With what else needful your good grace shalt chiik To be sent after me. Duke. Lee it be so; Good-night to every one. And tioble Sigrior, If virtue no delighted beauty lack, Your fon-in-law is far more fair than baek. Sen. Adieu, brave Moot, rife Defdmtema welL Bra. f added from the firfl edition. <- r :; 1* k feel.
B~ 6 Lo tO~a Iir MovB~d haffbl~B4'cvsco~ She- hiia dedeic'd her father, and: may thee' i !'. ,, 0h. : Ot.:M:life unpon her'faith;?: Honefft Jago, My Defilemona muff I leave to fhee 5 . I''pti'ythee let thy wife attend on h er; ? And bring her after in the best advantage; : Come, Defkdemoya, :" have bUaean hour Of love, of worldly matter, andvdiretion To speak with thee. We must obey the time. . SManen Ro . .rI ' a. 'J.. Manent' +ofrg and .'g [&-agrn:. t.. ,-i 'Rod. Jago. * ,. . Jago. What fayeft thot,. noble heart, SRod. What-.WilL-Fdo,- ti~neft thou? .ja^g. Why., 7goQo bed n4Ale ep. > . -,. Rod., I wil ioncontinently drown my self. Jago. If thou d4ots. l*fall never love rhee after. Why, thou filly gentleman! , . ; .. . Rod. It is silliness to live, when to live is a torments and then have we a prescription to dye, when death is our physician. Jago. 0 villanous! I have look'd upon the worl.d foi four times seven years, and since I could diftinguiih becwixt a benefit and an injury, I never found man that knew how to. love himself. Ere I would fay, I would drown my self for the loye ofa Gumn- ney-hen, I would change my humanity with a baboon. Rod. What should I do? I confess it ismy (hame to be fofond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it. Jago. Virtue? a fig, 'tis in our selves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are gardiners. So that if we will plant nettles, or fbw lettice; fete hyssop, and weed ,up thyme; supply it with one gender of herbs, or I.,~FIIZ L *?;..J13x1: ; i~ ,, ICkS~Jri~ :Ir ~: ! C 'i r7~~ L 1) i ..., I i c .,(-) r 1
or diflta&f it -wl~tlr maiy^ ^ reihrhct ^ba^^irbftpvi^1 w^ ^44renqc4P or kwaipred with industry^ ryby,rfibpower1%p4dildo4rigoi[fr hSgibsh ty of this lyes in ,.o,?wiir/ .,If thr ]allaa3ee:fo lisii haiFpot one scale of reason to poise anoiher. of u iii tt,- tthe^opd ^. 1i baseness of our natures would jcondlab t;u, w0 niioft 'prcp,fte.- conclusions. But we hayCe ireaifon' to cool our iragji.ng:mpocs,- our carnal stings, our unbited'lufts; whereof I take 'this -4dt you call love, to be a feCt,,:oryem .:::,::; ni -, "- ', --: * . It cannot be;:. .-.- v', - i'- :- !f. .:. r.-. . >: .,7-, . ,T. Jago. It is meerly a lufLtof ,the blood, and a permifiion of the will, Come, be a 'man: drowan thy kif?^ drown cats and blind puppies. I have pnrfeftcme thy.frjend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving, with cables of perdurable toughness. I could ne- ver better aeed thee than now. Put mony in thy purse; follow thou these wars, defeat thy favour with an usurped beard ;I fay, put mony in thy purse. It carinnot be that Defdemona should long continue her love to ithe Mo .-&--put moynr in thy Kpurfe -- noqr he his to her. It was a violent commeiinccementirti her, and thou shalt fee an answerable sequestration, -'-,-but pu mony in thy purfe.--Thefe Moors are changeable inbtheir .il --- fll thy purse with mony. The food'that to him now is as lu- fcious as locufits, fhall' hortly be as bitter as coloquintida. She must change for youth; when (he is fated with his body, she will find 'the errors of her choice ----- Therefore put mony in thy purfe--If thou wiit needs damn thy seif,- do it a more delicate way than drowning. Make:all the mony thou canst. If fanti- mony and a frail vow, betwixt an erring Barbarian and a super- fubrle "enetian, be not too hard for nmy wits, and all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her; the~cfore make mony. A pox of drowning thy felts, it is clean out of the way. 'Seek thou rather to be hang'd in compafling thy joy, than to be drown'd and go without her. Rod. Wilt-thou be fast to. my hopes, if -I depend on the issue ? V o L. VI. Rrr Jago. -t i e. dJ/grace thy features and make tby' fair countenance grim with a false beard.,
Jago. Thoti art Cure of me,-.Go, mak.ipoxy.I - hale told thee often, and I re-tell thee again and agai, ,I hate the Moor. My c-ause is hearted; thine hath no left reason. Let us be con- jlitetive in our revenge against him. If thoii cant cuckold :him, thou dost thy fdlf a pleafar~, me .a dpjrt. There are maQ y;e- vsens in the tcmb of time;, which wiUl be *delivened. Traverse, go, provide thy mony. We will have more of this to-morrow. Adieu. . . . Rod. Where shall we meet i'th' morning ? Jago. At ny lodging. Rod. Il 'be with thee betimes. - Jago. Go to, farewel. Do yoa 'hear, Rodarigo! Rod. PI11 fell all my land. [Exit. S C E N E XI. Manet Jago. Jago. Thus do I ever make my fool my purse; For I mine own gain'd knowledge should profane, If I flould time .expend with such a swain, But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor, And .it is -thought abroad, that 'cwixt my sheets He has done my office. I know not if't.be true----- 'But I, for meer fu'fpicion in that kind, Will do, as if for surety. He holds me well----- The better shall my purpose work on him; Cafflo's a proper man: let me fee now, To get this place, and to plume up my will A double knavery ----- How ? how? ----- let's fee ---- After some time, t'abufe Othello's ears, Th'at be is too familiar with his wife ---- He hath a person, and a smooth dispose To be ifufpe~ted; fram'd to make women false. The
The Moor is of a free and open nature, ; : ::-,u I -.- That thinks men honest that but seem tobfe ,o . n, a :- And will as tenderly be led by :itaifep' '. . As asses are: -"' ' I have't---- it is ingendred ---- Hell <aid night ; Must bring this monitrous birth to the world's light. [Exit. -, . ACT II. SCENE I. The. Capital City of Cyprus. Enter Montano Governor of Cyprus, and Gentlemen. MON TANO. S.IHIAT from the cape can you discern at sea ? z Gent. *Nothing" 'et alt, it is' a lti h-wrbitight w ' iW ! flood ' : . I cannot 'g'iixt the ' heavens and the'main Descry a "fail. [i l *and; Mont. Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements; If it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea, What ribs of oak, when b the huge mountains melt, Can hold the morties? what shall we hear ofthis ~ z Gent. A segregation of she Turki/h fleet; For do but fiand upon the foaming shore, The chiding billows seem to pelt the clouds, The wind-fhak'd surge, withi high and mriestrous main; Seems to cast water on the burning Bear, And quench the guards of th' ever C fired pole; rrhaven d prim. bmountai melt n them a haven. ed vrim. bmoutains melt on them. f ixed,
I never did like molestation viewy. . ' ... , On the enchased flood. . , ,, ;n ; Mont. If that the Turk/h fleet Be not infhelter'd and embay'd, they're drown'd: It is impoflible to bear it out. ..... ~SCENE II. Enter f yih ^entteman. 3 Gent. News, d lords, our wars are done: The desperate rempeft hath to bang'd the Turks, That their designment halts. Another Thip of venice Hath seen a grievous wrackkaind ;'ufferaance On most part of their fleet. Mont. How is this true ? 3 Gent. The thip is here. put in; A Feronejfo, Michael Caofio, *. . Lieutenant of the warlike Moor Othello, Is come on shore; the Moor himfelf's at sea, And is in full commission here for Cyprus. Mont. I'm glad on't; 'tis a worthy governor. 3 Gent. But this fame Cafio, though he speak of comfort,; Touching the Turki/h loss, yet he looks sadly, And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted With foul and violent tempest. Mont. Pray heav'ns he be: For I have ferv'd him, and the man commands Like a full soldier. Let's to the sea-side, As well to fee the vessel that's come in, As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello, Even 'till we make the main and th' aerial blue An indiftind regard. Gent. Come, let's do so; For d lads.
F or every minute is expeatancy, , - : Of more arrivance. c: .. S CE-r; ETi .,K nter Cafflo. *; i - ' : un , Caf Thanks to the valiarktof this warlike isle, That so approve the Moor: oh let the heav'ns Give him defence againEthe elements,' For I have loft him. on a dangerousfea. Mont. Is he well-fhipp'd .- Caf His bark is ftatly timber'd,. and his ,pik e Of very expert and approv'd allowance , Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to deathb .. Stand in bold cure. Ilithin.] A fail, a fail, a faill! I Caf. What noise? Gent. The town is empty ; on the brow, o'thl' sea ' " Stand ranks of people, and they cry a fail. Caf My hopes do shape him for the governor. , Gent. They do discharge their shot of courtefie: Our friends at least. Caf I pray you, Sir, go forth, And give us truth who 'tis that is arriv'd. Gent. I (hall. [Exit. Mont. But, good lieutenant, is your general wiv'd? Caf Most fortunately, he hath atchiev'd a maid That paragons description and wild fame: One that excels the quirks ofblazoning pens, And in th' eflential vesture of creation Do's bear all excellency --- 1, '; ' ' ' E N~S E
Enter Gentleman. How now ? who has put in? Gent. 'Tis one jago, Ancient to the general. Caf. H'as had iroft favourable and happy speed; TempefRs themselves, high seas, and howling winds, The gutter'd rocks, and coingregated sands, (Traitors t enfteep'd to clog the guiltless keel,) As having sense of beauty, do omit Their mortal natures, lettifg safe go by The divine Defdemona. Mont. What is (he ? Caf. She that I spake of, our great captain's captain: Left in the condu&t of the bold Jagio, Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts, A fennight's speed. Great rove, Otherlo guard, And swell his fail with thine own powerfful breath, That he may bless this bay with his tall thip, Make love's quick pants in Defdemona's arms, Give renew'd fire to our extinguifh'd spirits, And bring all Cyprus comfort-- SCENE V. Enter 1~eiemRona, Jago, Rodorigo, and aEmilia. O behold! The riches of the ship is eto-re o2 itre : You men of Cyprus, let her have your ktees. Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of he-awn, Before, behind thee, and on every hand Enwheel thee round. Def. t- qu. if enur'd.
Def. I thank you, valiant Cafjio, Wihat tidings cam yoti tell ee otfmy ord4. Caf He is not yet trivrJ'dt nr kPnow~ Ioigt But that he's well, and will be tIhotrly here. Def O but I feaQ-^-jhow lt you Capay.; . Caf The great contention of the sea and skis Parted our fellowship. Ac #lhrkc, ;a fail! Within.] A fail, a fail! Gent. They give this greeing ~@~a sw istads!L This likewise is a fifenId. GCf See for the news: Good Ancient, you are welco*me. We.,eir, arifite . [o /Emilia. Let it not gall your patience, good Jago, That I extend my manners. 'Tis my breeding That gives me this :bold fhewaof-couctefie. Jago. Sir, would fhe;give you fo.mush of ber ip8. As of her tongue she oft belfows on me, You'd have enough. Def. Alas! she has no speech. Jago. In faith, too much; I find it still, when I have lift to sleep,; Marry before your ladyship, I grant, She puts her tongue a little in her heart, And chides with thinking. ~mil. You have little cause to fay so. Jago. Come on, come on; you're pi&tures out of doors,, Bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens, Saints in your injuries, devils being offended, Players in your hufwifery, and houfwives in your beds. Def. Oh fie upon thee, slanderer. Jago. Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk; You rife to play, and go to bed to work. iEmil. You shall not write my praise. Jago. 4
Jago. No, let me not. Def What wouldf thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise me? Jago. Oh gentle lady, do not put me to't, Tor I am nothing, if not-critical. Def Come, one assay. There's one gone to the harbour--- Jago. Ay, madam. Def I am not merry; but I do beguile The thing I am, by seeming otherwise, Come, how wouldst thou praise me? Jago. I am about it, but indeed my invention comes from my pate, as birdlime does from freeze, it plucks out brains and alL But my muse -labours, and thus she is delivered. If /he be fair and wife, fairness and wit, The one's for use, the other ufeth it. Def. Well prais'd; how if (she be black and witty-? Jago. If Jhe be black, and thereto have a wit, She'll find a white that Jhlall her blackness fit. Def. Worse and worse. AEmil. How if fair and foolish? Jago. She never yet was foolish that was fair, For even her folly helpt her to an .heir. Def. Thefre are old fond paradoxes, to make fools laugh i'th' alehouse. What miserable praise haft thou for her that's foul and foolish Jago. There's none so foul and foopfh thereunto, But does foul pranks, which fair and wife ones do. Def. Oh heavy ignorance! thou praifeft the wvorfL best. But what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed? -one, that in the authority of her merit, did justly put on the rouch of very malice it self? Jago.
Jago. She that was ever fair, and never ,ruad .. 'r 'o . "Had tongue a: will, apid it*~'aieier ,loud; Never lackt gold,' aid yet &ent-*never gay, Fled from her wijh, and yet said now I may ; She' that when anger'd, her revenge being nigh, Bad her wrong flay, and her displeasure fly; She that in wisdom tever was so frail To change the cod's head for the falmon's tail; She that could think, andne'er disclose her mind, See Jfiitors following, and not look behind; S She was a wight, (if ever such wight were) Def To do what? Jago. To suckle fools, and chronicle small beer. Def. Oh most lame and impotent conclusion! do not learn of him, AEmilia, tho' he be thy husband. How fay you, Caffio, is he not a most profane and libefal 'coaifellobr ? - Caf. He speaks home, madam, yoa may relish him more in the soldier, than inthe scholar.. Jago. [Aside.] He takes her by the palm; ay, well said---- whisper ----- With as little a web as this, will T enfnare:as great a fly as Cajfio. Ay, smile upon her, do----I will t gyve thee in thine own courtship. You fay true, 'tis so indeed--- If fach tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenancy, it had been better you had nor kifs'd, your three fingers so oft, which now again you are most apt to play the Sir in. Very good ---well kifs'd and excellent curtefie ;--'tis Tso indeed --- Yet again --- your fin- gers to your lips ? would they were cliffer-pipes for your fake. [Trumpet. The Moor, I know his trumpet. Caf. 'Tis truly Co. Def. Let's meet him, and receive him. Caf. Lo, where he comes! V L.VI. . Sff SCENE "t or catch, fJackle.
SCENE VI. Enter Othello, and Atten dants. Oth. Oh my fair warrior! Def My dear Othello. Oth. It gives me wonder, great as my content, To fee you here before me. My foul's joy! If after every tempest come such calms, May the winds blow 'till they have waken'd death: And let the labouring bark climb hills of seas Olympus high; and duck again as low As hell's from heav'n. If I were now to die, 'Twere now to be most happy; for I fear My foul hath her content so absolute, That not another comfort like to this Succeeds in unknown fate. Def. The heav'ns forbid, But that our loves and comforts thould increase, Ev'n as our days do grow. Oth. Amen to that, sweet powers! I cannot speak enough of this content, It flops me here: ic is too much of joy. And this and this the greatest discords be [AKing her. That e'er our hearts shall make. Jago. Oh you are well-tun'd now; but I'1l let down the pegs that make this mufick, as honest as I am. [4Aide. Oth. Come, let's to the cafitle. Now, friends, our wars are done; the Turks are drown'd. How do our old acquaintance of this isle? Honey, you fball be well defir'd in Cyprus, I've found great love amongfl them. Oh my sweet, I prattleoutof faihion, and I dote
In mine own comfort. Pr'ythee, good Jaago, Go to the bay, and disembark my coffers: Bring thou the master to the cittadel, He is a good one, and his worthiness Does challenge much refpe&. Come, Defdemena, Once more well met at Cyprus. [Exeunt Othello and Defdemona. S CEN E VII. Manent Jago and Rodorigo. Jago. Do you meet me presently at the harbour. Come thi- ther, if thou be'f1 valiant; as they fay, base men being in love, have then a nobility in their natures, more than is native to them ---- lift me; the lieutenant to-night watches on the court of guard. Firff, I muff tell thee this: Defdemona is dire&ly in love with him. Rod. With him? why, 'tis not possible. Jago. Lay thy fingers thus; and let thy foul be inftr&ted. Mark me with what violence (he first lov'd the Moor, but for bragging, and telling her fantastical lies. And will ihe love him still for prating ? let not thy difereet heart think it. Her eye muff be fed. And what delight shall (he have to look on the de- vil? When the blood is made dull with the a& of sport, there should be a game to inflame it, and to give satiety a fresh appe- tite; loveliness in favour, sympathy in years, manners, and beauties: all which the Moor is defetive in. Now for want of these requir'd conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find it self abus'd, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor; very nature will inftrut her in it, and compel her to some second choice. Now, Sir, this granted, (as it is a mofi preg- nant and unforc'd position) who flands fb eminent in the degree of this fortune, as Caffi0 does? a knave very voluble; no further conscionable, than in putting on the meer form of civil and hu- Sff 2 main
man seeming, for the better compassing of his salt and most hid- den loose affeAion ? a slippery and subtile knave, a finder of occa- fions , that has an eye can fiamp and counterfeit advantages, tho' true advantage never present it felt. A devilish knave! besides, the knave is handfom, young, and hath all those requisites in him, that folly and green minds look after. A pestilent compleat knave! and the woman hath found him already. Rod. I cannot believe that of her, fhe's full of most blefs'd condition. Jago. Blets'd figs end the wine she drinks is made of grapes. If (he had been blefs'd, i(he would never have lov'd the Moor: blefs'd pudding! didft thou not fee her paddle with the palm of his hand? didft not mark that ? Rod. Yes, that I did; but that was but courtefie. Jago. Letchery, by this hand; an index, and obscure prologue to the history of lust, and foul thoughts. They met so near with their lips, that their breaths embrac'd together. Villanous thoughts, Rodorgo ! when thefed mutualities Co marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master, and main exercise th'incorporate conclusion: pih---But, Sir, be you rul'd by me. I have brought you from lenice. Watch you to-night; for the command, PIll lay't upon you. Cajilo knows you not: I'll not be far from you. Do you find ofbme occasion to anger Ca//io, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which the time (hall more favourably minifiter. Rod. Well. Jago. Sir, he's rash, and very sudden in choler: and happily may strike at you. Provoke him that he may; for even out of that will I cause thole of Cyprus to mutiny: wholfe qualification shall comeinto no truetafite again, but by difplanting of Caffio. So flhall you have a shorter journey to your desires, by the means I shall then have to prefer them: And the impediments mofi pro- fitably removed, without which there was no expectation of our prosperity. Rod. d mutabilities.
Rod. I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity. Jago. I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the cittadel. I must fetch his necessaries aifhore. Farewel. Rod. Adieu. [Exit. S C E NE VIII. Manet Jago. Jacgo. That CaJIo loves her, I do well believe: That she loves him, 'tis apt, and of great credit. The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not, Is of a constant, loving, noble nature, And I dare think he'll prove to Defdemona A mofl dear husband. Now I love her too, Not out ofabfolute lust, (though peradventure I stand accountant for as great a fin,) But partly led to diet my revenge, For that I do fufpeT the lusty Moor Hath leapt into my feat. The thought whereof Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards; And nothing can, or shall content my foul 'Till I am even'd with him, wife for wife: Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor At least into a jealoufie so firong, That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do, If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace For his quick hunting, itand the putting on; I'll have our Michael Cajfio on the hip, Abuse him to the Moor in the right garb, (For I fear Cacio with my night-cap too,) Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me, For making him egregiously an ass, And pra6tifing upon his peace and quiet, Even e razk. ed. prim.
Even to mrnadnefs. 'Tis here-:-but yet confas'd, Knavery's plain face is never seen, 'till us'd. [Exit. SCENE IX. The STREET. Enter Herald, wth a Proclamation. Her. T Tis Othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant General, L that upon certain tidings now arriv'd, importing the meer perdition of the Turkfoh fleet, every man put himself into triumph: Some to dance, Tome to make bonefires, each man to what sport and revels his mind leads him. For betides this beneficial news, it is the celebration of his nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. All officees are open, and there is full liberty of feasting, from this present hour of five, 'till the bell have toll'd eleven. Bless the isle of Cyprus, and our noble General Othello. [Exit. Enter Othello, Defdemarna, Cafiio, and dttendants. Oth. Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night. Let's teach our selves that honourable flop, Not to out-fport discretion. Caf. Jago hath direction what to do: But notwithstanding with my personal eye Will I look to't. Oth. Jago is most honest: Michael, good night. To-morrow with your earliest, Let me have speech with you. Come, my dear love, The purchace made, the fruits are to ensue, That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you. Good night. [Exeunt Qthelo and Defdemona. Enter
Enter Jago. Caf Welcome, Jago; we must to the watch. Jago. Not this hour, lieutenant: 'tis not yet ten o'th' clock. Our General cast us thus early for the love of his Defdemona: whom let us not therefore blame ; he hath not yet made the wan- ton night with her: and the is sport for Jove. Caf She's a most exquisite lady. Jago. And I'll warrant her full of game. Caf. Indeed fhe's a most fresh and delicate creature, Jago. What an eye flthe has? nethinks it founds a parley to provocation. Caf. An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest. Jago. And when she speaks, is it not an alarutm to love ? Caf. She is indeed perfection. Jago. Well, happiuefs to their theets: come, lieutenant, I have a stoop of wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants, that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello. Caf Not to-night, good Jago: I have very poor and unhap- py brains for drinking. I could well wi(h courtefie would invent some other custom of entertainment. Jago. Oh, they our are friends: but one cup, I'll drink for you. Caf. I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that was craftily qualified too: and behold what innovation it makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more. Jago. What, man? 'tis a night of revels, the gallants de- fire it. Caf. Where are they? Jago. Here at the door; I pray you call them in. Caf I'll do't, but it dislikes me. [Exit Cafio. Jago. If I can fasten but one cup upon him, SWith
With that which he hath drunk to-night already, He'll be as full of quarrel and offence As my young miftrefs's dog.--- Now, my sick fool, Rodorigo, Whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong fide out, To Defdemona hath to-night carouz'd Potations pottle deep and he's to watch, Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits, That hold their honours in a wary distance, The very elements of this warlike isle, Have I to-night flufae'd with flowing caps, f And they watch too. Now 'mongft this flock of drunkards, Am I to put our Caffio in Come a&ion That may offend the isle. But here they come. *If consequence do but approve my dream, My boat fails freely, both with wind and stream. SCENE Enter Caflio, Montano, and Gentlemen. Caf 'Fore heav'n, they have given me a rouse already. Mont. Good faith a little one: not pafi a pint, as I am a fol- dier. Jago. Some wine ho! [Jago Jings. And let me the canakin clink, clink, And let me the canakin c/ink. A foldier's a man; oh man's life's but a span, Wthy then let a soldier drink. Some wine, boys. Caf 'Fore heav'n, an excellent song. Jago. I learn'd it in England: where indeed-they are most po- tent in potting. Your Dane, your German, and your fwag-belly'd Hol- ! and the watch too. ed. prim. X.
Hllander, - drink ho--are nothing to your'E&igJflh Caf. Is your Eng&Fhman so exquisite in his drinking? jago. Why he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk. He B sweats not to overthrow your Almasn. He gives your Hollander a vomit, ere the next pottle can be fil'd. Cafr To the health of our General. Mont. I am for it, lieutenant: and I'll do you justice. Jago. Oh sweet England. King Stephen was and-a worthy peer, His breeches cofl him but a crown, He held them fix pence all too dear, With that he calid the tailor lown: He was a wight of high renown, And thou art but of low degree: 'fis pride that pulls the country down, And take thy old cloak about thee. Some wine ho. Caf Why this is a more exquisite long than the other. Jago. Will you hear't again? Caf. No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place, that does those things. Well ---- Heaven's above all; and there be fouls that must be saved, and there be fouls must not be saved. Jago. It's true, good lieutenant. Caf For mine own part, (no offence to the General, nor any man of quality ;) I hope to be saved. Jago. And so do I too, lieutenant. Caf. Ay, but by your leave, not before me. The Lieutenant is to be saved before the Ancient. Let's have no more of this; let's to our affairs. Forgive our fins---- gentlemen let's look to our business. Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk: this is my Ancient; this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am VOL. VI. Ttt not swears not.
not drunk Q*WS I can ftadd wi aaogh, aud I :fpeak'cwelenough. Gent. Excellent wetl. C?f Why very well hen: you tnuft not think then that I ra idrtnk. [Exit. S CE NE XI. Manent Jago and Montano. Mont. To the platform, masters, come, let's fee the watch. Jago. You fee this fellow that is gone before, He is a soldier, fit to Ptond by CSfar, And give diretion. And do bat fee his vice, 'Tis to his virtues a just equinox, The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pity of him; I fear the truif Othello puts him in, On some odd time of his infirmity, Will fihake this island. Motr. But is he often thus ? Jago. 'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep. He'll watch the horologue a double fit, If drink rock not his cradle. iWont. It were well The General were put in mind of it: Perhaps he fees it not, or his good nature Prizes the virtue that appears in CaJ/io, And looks not on his evils: is not this true? Enter Rodorigo. sago. How now, Rodorigo / 5 pray you after the lieutenant, go. [Exit Rod. Mont. And 'tis great pity that thenoble Moor Should hazard such a place as his own second,~ With one of an ingraft infirmity;
It were an honest ation to fay Lfo Unto the Moor, Jago. Nor I, for this shit island; I do love Caffio well, and would do much To cure him of this evil. Hark, what noise? Re-enter Caffio pursuing Rodorigo. Caf. You rogue! you rascal! --- Mon. What's the matter, lieutenant ? Caf. A knave teach me my duty ? I'll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle. Rod. Beat me--- Caf. Dost thou prate, rogue? Mon. Nay, good lieutenant? [Staying him. I pray you, Sir, hold your hand. Caf. Let me go, Sir, or I'll h knock you o'er the mazzard. Mon. Come, come, you're drunk. Gas Drunk?--- [They fight. Jago. Away I fay, go out and cry a mutiny. [Exit Rodorigo. Nay, good lieutenant ---- Alas, gentlemen-- Help ho ----Lieutenant-- Sir, Montano --. Help masters! here's a goodly watch indeed-- Who's that who rings the bell --- diablo, ho! [Bell rings The town will rife. Fie, fie, lieutenant! You will be fham'd for ever. S C E XT E XII. Enter Othello, and A#endants. Oth. What is the matter here? Mont. I bleed fill, I am hurt, but not to th' death. Oth. Hold for your lives. Jago. Hold ho! lieutenant--- Sir-- Montamo -- Gentlemen--- TT tt z Have h know,
Have you forgot all place of sease and duty ? The General speaks to you-- hold, hold, for (hame-- Oth. Why how now ho? ..from whence arifeth this Are we turn'd Turks? and to our selves do that Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites? For christian fiame, put by this barbarous brawl,; He that stirs next to carve for his own rage, Holds his foul light: he dies upon his motion.. Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle From her propriety. What is the matter? Honest Jago, that looks dead with grieving, Speak: who began this? on thy love I charge thee. Jago. I do not know; friends all, but now, even now- In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom Divesting them for bed; and then, but now---- As iffome planiet had unwitted men, Sword out, and tilting one at other's breafs, In opposition bloody. I can't speak Any beginning to this peevish odds, And would in aAion glorious I had loft Those legs that brought me to a part of it! Oth. How comes it,_ Michael, you are thus forgot . Caf. I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak. Oth. Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil-: The gravity and stillness of your youth The world hath noted. And your name is great In mouths of wisest censure. What's the matter, That you unlace your reputation thus, And spend your rich opinion, for the name Of a night-brawler? give me answer to it. Mont. Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger; Your officer, Jago, can inform you, ,While I spare speech, which something now offends me,
Of all that I do know, nor know I ought By me that's said or done amiss this night, Unless felf-charity be sometimes a vice, And to defend our selves it be a fin, When violence assails us. Oth. Now, by heav'n, My blood begins my latfer guides to rule, And paflfion, having my beft-judgment choler'd, Affays to lead the way. If I once stir, Or do but lift this arm, the befrof you. Shall fink in my rebuke. Give me to know How this foul rout began ? who set it on ? And he that is approv'd in his offence, Tho' he had twinn'd with me both; at a births, Shall lose me. What, in a town of war, Yet wild, the peoples hearts brim-full of fear, To manage private and domeftick quarrel? In night, and on the court and guard 'of safety . 'Tis monstrous. Say 7ago, who began't? Mont. If partially affin'd, or leagu'd in office,. Thou dope deliver more or less than truth, Thou art no soldier. Jago. Touch me not so near : I'd rather have this tongue cut from my mouth, Than it should do offence to Michael:Caffio. Yet I perfwade my self, to speak the truth Shall nothing wrong him. Thus 'tis, General: Montano and my self being in speech, There comes a fellow crying out for help, And Cafflo following with determin'd sword, To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman Steps in to Ca/io, and intreats his pause,. My self the crying fellow did pursue Le&
Left by his clamour (as iv so fell out) The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot, Out-ran my purpose: I retura'd the rather For that I heard the clink and fall of swords, And Cafio high in oath; which 'till to-night I ne'er might fay before. When I came back, (For this was brief) I found them close together At blow and thiirt, even as again they were When you your self did part them. More of this matter cannot I report. But men are men; the best sometimes forget; Tho' Ca~lo did some little wrong to him, As men in rage ifrike those that with them best, Yet surely Cajflo, I believe, receiv'd From him that fled some firange indignity, Which patience could not pars. Oth. I know, Jago, Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter, Making it light to oafflo. CQeiao I love thee, But never more be offiter of mine. Enter Defdemona attended. Look if my gentle love be not rais'd up: i'll make thee an example. Def What's the matter? Oth. All is well, sweeting; come, away to bed. Sir, for your hurts, my self will be your surgeon. Lead him off: Jago, look with care about the town, And silence those whom this vile brawl diftra&ed. Come, Defdemona, 'tis the foldier's life, To have their balmy slumbers wak'd with ifrife. [Exeunt. SCENE
SCE NE XIII, Manent Jago and Cafjio. Jago. What, are you hurt, lieutenant ? Caf Pas all surgery. Jago. Marry, heav'n forbid. Caf Reputation, reputation, reputation,! oh I have foif my reputation! I have loft the immortal part of my self, and what remains is bestial. My reputation, Jago, my reputaeptation ---- Jago. As I am an honest man, I had thought you had recei- ved some bodily wound; there is more.' sense in that than in re- putation. Reputation is an idle, and molt false imposition; oft got without merit, and loft without deserving. You:have loft no reputation at all, unless you repute your frlf fuoh a loser. What man----there are ways to recover Ithe General again. You are but now caRs in his mood, a punishment more in policy than in malice, even so as one.would beat his offencelefs dog to affright an imperious lion. Sue to him again, and he's.yours. Caf I will rather sue to be defpis'd, ,than to deceive so good a commander, with so flight, so drunken, and so indifcreec an offi- cer. Drunk ? and speak, parrot ? and squabble? swagger: swear ? and discourse fustian with ones own shadow ? oh thou invisible spirit of wine! if thou haft no name to be known by, let us calL thee devil. Jagoa. What was he that yoa follow'd with your sword what had he done to you? Caf. I know not. Jago. Is't possible? Caf I remember a mass of things, but nothing ,diftinatry: a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. Oh, that men fbould put an enemy in their mouths, to feal.away their brains! that we should with joy, pleasance, revel and ,applause, transform our felve; in- to beasts, Jago. i offence ed. prim.
Jago. Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus recover'd ? Caf It hath pleas'd the devil, drunkenners, to give place to the devil, wrath; one unperfeanefs thews me another, to make me frankly despise my self. Jago. Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and the condition of this country Rfands, I could hear- tily wish this had not befain: but since it is as it is, mend it for your own good. Caf I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me, I am a drunkard ? had F as many mouths as Hydra, such an an- fwer would stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a beafi. Every inordinate cup is un- blefs'd, and the ingredient is a devil. Jago. Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well us'd: exclaim no more against it. And, good lieute- nant, I think you think I love you. Caf I have well approv'd it, Sir. I drunk! Jago. You, or any man living, may be drunk at some time, man. I tell you what you shall do: our General's wife is now the General. I may fay so, in this respect, for that he hath de- voted and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and devotement of her parts and graces. Confess your self freely to her: importune her help, to put you in your place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than the is requefled. This broken joint between you and her husband, intreat her to splinter. And my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack of your love shall grow ifronger than it was before. Caf. You advise me well. Jago. I protest in the sincerity of love, and honefl kindness. Caf I think it freely: and betimes in the morning I will be- feech the virtuous De/demona to undertake for me: I am de- fperate
fperate of my fortunes, if they check me. Jago. You are in the right: good night, lieutenant, I mult to the watch. Caf Good night, honest Jago. [Exit Caffio. SCENE XIV. Manet Jago. Jago. And what's he then, that says I play the villain? When this. advice is free I give, and hone&s, Likely to thinking, and indeed the course . To win the Moor again. For 'tis mos eafie Th' inclining De/demona to subdue In any honest fait: the's fram'd as fruitful As the free elements. And then for her To win the Moor, were't to renounce his baptism, All seals and symbols of redeemed fin, '. His foul is so enfetter'd to her love 8f That she may make, unmake, do what she lift, Even as her appetite shall play the God With his weak fun&ion. Am I then a villain, To counsel Caffo to this parallel course, Direatly to his good? 'Tis hell's divinity: When devils will their blackest fins put on, They do suggest at firll with heav'nly thews, As I do now. For while this honest fool Plies Defdemona to repair his fortune, And the for him pleads strongly to the Moor; I'll pour this pestilence into his ear, That she repeals him for her body's lult: And by how much she ifrives to do him good, She (hall undo her credit with the Moor. So will I turn her virtue into pitch, V o L. VI. U u And
And out of her own goodaefs make the net That (hal.la- maihefi them all. How aow, lRodrigo/ SCENE XV. Enter Rodorigo. Rod. I follow here in the chace, not like a h hunts, but one that fills ip the cry. My mony is aln I have been to-night exceedingly well cudgelled I and I issue will be, I (hall have so much experience for my j so with no mony at ail and a little more wit, retaz Venice. Jago. How poor are they that have not patience What wound did ever beal bat by degrees ? Thou know'ft we work by wit, and not by witchcrafr5 And wit depends on dilatory itne; Does't not go well . Cajio hath beatena thee, And thou by that small hurt haft calhier'd <Cco. Tho' other things grow fair againfa the fan, Yet fruits that blossom firff will si4s be ripe: Content thy self a whie. Ik troth 'tis morninag Pleasure and action make the hours seem (hort. Retire thee; go where thou arc bilekted : Away, I fay, thou fhalc knaow miote hereafter: Nay, get thee gone. [Exit Two things are to be doiae; My wife must move for Ca/fi> 'to her mifi-rtfs: I'll let her on to draw the Moor apart, And bring him jump, when he may Caffio find Solliciting his wife: ay, that's the way: Dull not device, by coldnee and delay. ound that nof spent ; [ think the ,ais; anad :a again to Rodorigo. [Exit. ACT - en-mesh, a metaphor from taking lirds in meshes.
A C T III. S C E NE L Otchello's Palace. Enter Cafijo, iMuficans, and Clown. C A S S I 0. ^ A S T E RS, play here, I will content your pains, Something that's briefs and bid good-morrow, h% 11~31~Genaeral. Clown. Why, masters, have your infiruments ^ ~ been in Naples, that they speak i'th' nose thus ? Muff How, Sir, how? Clown. Are there, I pray yoy, wind instruments? Muff Ay, marry are they, Sir. Clown. Oh, thereby hangs a tale. Muf Whereby hangs a tale, Sir? Clown. Marry, Sir, by many a wind initrument that I kntioW But, masters, here's monay for you: and the General so likes your mufick, that he desires you for loves fake to make no noise with it. Muff Well, Sir, we will not. Clown. If you have any mufick that may not be heard, to't a- gain. But, as they fay, to hear mufick, the General does not greatly care. Muf. We have none such, Sir. Clown. Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I'll away. Go, vanish into air, away. [Exit Muf Cnrf Dofl thou hear me, mine honest friend? Clown. No, I hear not your honest friend; I hear you. Cal. Pr'ychee, keep up thy quillets, there's a poor peice of gold for U uu thee ;
thee: if the gentlewoman that attends the General's wife be stir- ring, tell her there's one CaJio entreats of her a little favour of speech. Wile thou do this? Clown. She is flirring, Sir, if she will stir hither, I (hall teem to notifie unto her. [Exit Clown. Caf. Do my good friend. To him enter Jago. In happy time, Jago. Jago. You have not been a-bed then? Caf. Why, no; the day had broke before we parted. I have made bold to fend in to your wife; My suit is, that she will to Defdemona Procure me some access. Jago. I'll fend her presently: And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor Out of the way, that your converse and biUfinefs May be more free. [Exit. Caf. I humbly thank you for't. I never knew A Florentine more kind and hones. To him enter iEmilia. Amil. Good-morrow, good lieutenant, I am sorry For your displeasure; but all will sure Be well. The General and his wife are talking of it: And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies; That he you hurt is of great fame is Cyprus, And great affinity; and that in wisdom He might not but refuse you. But he protests he loves you, And needs no other suitor but his likings, To bring you in again. Caf. Yet, I beseech you, If you think fit, or that it may be done, Give
Give me advantage of some brief discourse With Defdemona alone. A^mil. Pray you come in, I will bellow you where you shall have time To speak your bosom freely. Caf. I'm much bound to you. [Exeunt. SCENE II. Enter Othello, Jago, and Gentlemen. Oth. These letters give, Jago, to the pilot, And by him do my duties to the senate; That done, I will be walking on the works, Repair there to me. Jago. My good lord, I'll do'r. Oth. This fortification, gentlemen, (hall we fee't ? Gent. We'll wait upon your lordship. [Exeunt. S CENE IllI. An Apartment. Enter Defdemona, Cafio, and Emilia. Def. Be thou affur'd, good Ca/lio, I will do All my abilities in thy behalf. AEmil. Good madam, do: I know it grieves my husband As if the cause were his. Def. Oh that's an honest fellow; doubt not, Ca/io, But I will have my lord and you again As friendly as you were. Caf Most bounteous madam, W7hatever (hall become of Michael Cajfo, He's never any thing but your true servant. Def. I know't, I thank you; you do love my lord, You've
You've known him long, and be you well .affulTr'd, He shall in firangenef fitand no farther off Than in a politick difitance. Cal. Ay, but lady, That policy may either las so long, Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet, Or breed it self so out of circumfiances, That I being absent, and my place fupply'd, My General will forget my love and service., Def. Do not doubt that; berore :zltilia here, I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee, If I do vow a friendihip, I'll perform it To the last article. My lord fal never refit, i'll watch him tame, and talk him out of patience; His bed hall seem a school, his board a Lhrift, I'll intermingle every thing he do's With Cffio's fuir: therefore be .merryr, Cajio, For thy ibllicitor (hall rather die, Than give thy cause away. SCENE IV. Enter Othello and jago. Emil. Madam, here comes my lord. Caf. Madam, Ill take my leave. Def. Why stay, and hear me speak. Caf. Madam, not now; I'm very ill at ease. Unfit for mine own purpof(s. Def. Well, do your discretion. - [E Jago. Hah? I like not that. Oth. WXhat doff thou fay? Jago. Nothing, my lord; or if----I know not what. Oth. Was not that Cdjfo parted from my wife? J0go. :it ~;aflc~o.
Jago. Cafflo, my lord? na fare, 1 atsiot thiak it, That he would feal away Io guilty-like, Seeing you coming. Oth. I believe 'twas he, Def. How now, my lord ? I have been talking with a fitor here, A man that languishes in your difpleafare. Oth. Who is't you nmean ? Def. Why your lieutenant C.offi Good my loird, If I have any grace, or power to move you, His present reconciliation take. For if he be not one that truly loves you, That errs in ignorance, and naot in cmaaing, I have no judgment in an hneft face. I pr'ythee call him back. Oth. Went he hence nov Def. In sooth, so hautbled, That he hath left part of his grief with me To fuffer with him. Good love, call him back. Oth. Not now, sweet Defdemoma, irme other time, Def: But fball't be shortly? Oth. Sooner, fweec, for you. Def. Shall't be to-night, at si~pper Oth. Not tomnight. Def. To-norrow ditner then . Oth. 'I (hall not dine at home: I meet the captains at the citadel. Def. Why then to-morrow night, or Tuesday morn, Or Tuesday noon, or night, or Wednesday morn. I pr'ythee name the time, but let it not Exceed three days; in faith he's penitent: And yet his trespass, in oar common reason, (Save that they fay the wars must make example, Out
Out of their befl,) is not almoit a fault T'incurr a private check. When shall he come ? Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my foul What you would ask me, that I would deny, Or fitand so a mutt'ring on? what? Michael Cai/o/ --/ That came a wooing with you, and many a time When I have spoke of you dispraisingly Hath ta'en your part, to have so much to do To bring him in ? trust me, I could do much -- Oth. Pr'ythee no more, let him come when he will, I will deny thee nothing. Def. Why, this is not a boon: 'Tis as I %hould encreat you wear your gloves, Or feed on nourifling meats, or keep you warm; Or sue to you, to do peculiar profit To your own person. Nay, when I have suit, Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed, It shall be full of poize and difficulty, And fearful to be. granted. Oth. Iwill deny thee nothing. Whereon I do beseech thee, grant me this, To leave me but a little to my self. Def. Shall I deny you? no: farewel, my lord. Oth. Farewel, my Defdemona, I'll come firaight. Def. lmiia, come; be as your fancies teach you: Whate'er you be. I am obedient. [Exeunt. SC E N E V. Manent Othello and Jago. Oth. Excellent wretch! perdition catch my foul, But I do love thee; and when I love thee not, Chaos is come again.  mnamrn',iing.
Jago. My noble lord. Oth. What doff thou fay, Jago? Jago. Did Michael Ca/f/, when you woo'd my lady, Know of your love? Oth. He did from first to lass; why doff thou ask? Jago. But for a fatisfa<tion of my thought, No further harm. Oth. Why of thy thought, Jago? Jago. I did not think he'd been acquainted with it. Oth. Oh yes, and went between us very oft. Jago. Indeed! Oth. Indeed! ay, indeed. Difcern'fl thou ought of that ? Is he not hones ? Jago. Honeff, my lord? Oth. Honefri ? ay, honeff. Jago. My lord, for ought I know. Oth. What dost thou think ? Jago. Think, my lord!--. Oth. Think, my lord! why by heav'n, thou eccho'ff me; As if there were some monster in thy thought Too hideous to be shewn. Thou doff mean something: I heard thee fay but now, thou lik'dft not that, --. When Ca/io left my wife. What did'ft not like? And when I told thee, he was of my counsel, In my whole course of wooing; thou cry'dff, indeed? And didit contrad: and purse thy brow together, As if thou then hadf (hut up in thy brain Some horrible conceit: if thou doff love me Shew me thy thought. Jago. My lord, you know I love you. Oth. I think thou doff: And for I know thou'rt full of love and honeflty, And weigh'fl thy words before thou giv'ft them breath, V o L. VI. X x x Therefore
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more: For such things, in a false disloyal knave, Are tricks of cufltom; but in a man that's jult, They're b close denotements working from the heart, That passion cannot rule. Jago. For Michael Cafflo, I dare be sworn, I think, that he is hones. Oth. I think so too. Jago. Men should be what they seem. Or those that be not, would they might seem none. Oth. Certain, men should be what they seem. Jago, Why, then I think Caffi's an honeflt man. Oth. Nay, yet there's more in this, I pray thee speak to me as to " thy thinkings, As thou dofp ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts, The worst of words. yago. Good, my lord, pardon me. d Tho' I am bound to every a&t of duty, I am not bound to that, all slaves are free to; Utter my thoughts !-- Why fay they're vile and false e As where's that palace whereinto ftil things Sometimes intrude not . who has a breafi so pure, But some uncleanly apprehensions Keep leets and law-days, and in sessions fit With meditations lawful . Oth. Thou doff conspire agafinft thy friend, Jago, If thou but think'fl him wrong'd, and mak'ft his ear A fitranger to thy thoughts, Jago. I do beseech you, Though I perchance am vicious in my guess, (As I confess it is my nature's plague To fpie into abuse, and oft my jealoufie Shapes faults that are not,) I intreat you then From b cold ~il~~ioils. s n2Sl d Im noc bo~nr;l
From one that so imperfe&ly conceits, Your wisdom would not build your feWs a trouble Out of' my scattering and unsure observance: It were not for your quiet, nor your good, Nor for my manhood, honefy and wisdom, To let you know my thoughts. Oth. What dost thou mean ? sago. Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, Is the immediate jewel of their fouls. c Who fleals my purse seals traub, 'tis something, nothing; ' 'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thoufainds, ' But he that filches from me my good name, ? Robs me of that, which not enriches him, ? And makes me poor indeed. Oth. I'll know thy thoughts---- Jago. You cannot, if my heart were in your hand; Nor shall not, whilif 'tis in my custody. Oth. Ha! Jago. Oh, beware, my lord, ofjealoufie, It is a green-ey'd monster, which doth mock The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss, Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger; But oh, . what damned minutes tells he o'er, Who dotes, yet doubts; fufpe&s, yet ifrongly loves! Oth. Ohmifery! Jago. Poor, and content, is rich, and rich enough; But riches endless, is as poor as winter, To him that ever fears he shall be poor. Good heaven! the fouls of all my tribe defend From jealoufie. Oth. Why? why is this? Think'ft thou I'd make a life ofjealoufie ? To follow still the changes of the moon, Xxx z With c his.
With fresh suspicions? No; to be once in doubt, Is once to be refolv'd. Exchange me for agoat, When I shall turn the business of my foul To such exufflicate and blown surmises, Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealous, To fay my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company, Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well; Where virtue is, these are most virtuous. Nor from mine own weak merits, will I draw The smallest fear, or doubt of her revolt, For fihe had eyes, and chore me. No, Jago, I'll fee before I doubt; when I doubt, prove; And on the proof, there is no more but this, Away at once with love, or jealoufie. Jago. I'm glad of this; for now I shall have reason To shew the love and duty that I bear you With franker spirit. Therefore, as I'm bound, Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof. Look to your wife, observe her well with Caffio, Wear your eye, thus; not jealous, nor secure I would not have your free and noble nature Out of felf-bounty be abus'd; look to't. I know our country disposition well; In ienice they do let heav'n fee the pranks They dare not shew their husbands; their best conscience Is not to leave't undone, but keep't unknown. Oth. Dost thou fay so ? Jago. She did deceive her father, marrying you, And when she feem'd to shake, and fear your looks, She lov'd them most. Oth. And so (he did. Jago. Go to then; She that so young could give out such a seeming To
To feal her father's eyes up, close as oak--. He thought 'twas witchcraft--- but I'm much to blame: I humbly do beseech you of your pardon For too much loving you. Obth. I'm bound to you for ever. Jago. I fee this hath a little dafh'd your spirits. Oth. Not a jot, not a jot. Jago. Trust me, I fear it has: I hope you will confider, what is spoke Comes from my love. But I do fee you're mov'd-- I am to pray you, not to itrain my speech To grosser issues, nor to larger reach, Than to suspicion. Oth. I will not. Jago. Should you do so, my lord, My speech would fall into fuilch vile success, Which my thoughts aim not at. Ca/io's my worthy friend. My lord, I fee you're mov'd-- Othb. No, not much mov'd--. I do not think but Defdemona's honefit. Jago. Long live (he so; and long live you to think so. Otrh. And yet how nature erring from it self---- Jago. Ay, there's the point;-- as (to be bold with you) Not to asset many proposed matches Of her own clime, complexion and degree, Whereto we fee in all things nature tends: Soh! one may fminell in such, a will moist rank, Foul difproportions, thoughts unnatural. But, pardon me, I do not in position Diftintly speak of her, tho' I may fear Her will, recoiling to her better judgment, May fall to match you with her country forms, And haply so repent. Oth.
Oth. Farewel, farewel; If more thou dost perceive, let me know more: Set on thy wife t'obferve. Leave me, Jago. Jago. My lord, I take my leave. [Going. Oth. Why did I marry? This honeff creature, doubrlefs, Sees, and knows more, much more than he unfolds. Jago. My lord, I would I might intreat your honour To scan this thing no farther; leave it to time: Altho' 'tis fit that Ca/o have his place, For sure he fills it up with great ability, Yet if you please to put him off a while, You shall by that perceive him, and his means; Note, if your lady strain his entertainment With any strong, or vehement importunity, Much will be seen in that. In the mean time, Let me be thought too bufie in my fears, (As worthy cause I have to fear I am,) And hold her free, I do beseech your hoanour. Oth. Fear not my government. Jago. I once more take my leave, [Exit. S CENE VI. Manet Othello. Oth. This fellow's of exceeding honefly, And knows all qualities, with a ieam'd spirt, Of human dealings. If I prove her haggard, tTho' that her jesses were my dear heart-flirings, I'd whiite her off, and let her down the wind To prey at fortune. Haply, for I'm black And have not those soft parts of conversation That chamberers have; or for I am declin'd Into ;- - metaphor taken from falconry. Jesses are the firings they hold a hawk by.
Into the vale of years, yet that's not much--. She's gone, I am abus'd, and my relief Muat be to loath her. Oh the curse of marriage! That we can call there delicate creatures ours, And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad, And live upon the vapour of a dungeon, Than keep a corner in the thing I love, For others use. Yet 'tis the plague of great-ones; Prerogativ'd are they less than the base; 'Tis destiny unfhunnable like death. Even then, this forked plague is fated to us, When we do quicken. Defdemona comes! Enter Defdemona and tEmilia; Iffline be false, oh then heav'n mocks it self? I'll not believe't. Def. How now, my dear OtheUo ? Your dinner, and the generous islanders, By you invited, do attend your presence. Oth. I am to blame. Def. Why do you speak so faintly? Are you not well? Oth. I have a pain upon my forehead here. Def Why, that's with watching, 'twill away again, Let me but bind it hard, within this hour It will be well. Oth. Your napkin is too little ; [She drops ber handkerchief. Let it alone: come, I'll go in with you. Def. I am very sorry that you are not well, [Exeum. SCENE
S C EN E VII.' , ,Mlanet iEmilia. .Amil. I am glad i have fouhd this.napkin ; This was her first remembrance from the Moor; My wayward husband hath a hundred times, t^;boFd meh steal it. But-fhe foloves the token, (For he conjur'd her, (he fhouldever-keep it) ,That she reserves it evermore abouther, ,,', To kiss and talk to. I'llrHhdve tre, work tadenf out, And give't Jago; -what he'll dowith it, ' Heav'n knows, not I: . I nothing, but to please his faatafie. '.-. sa;..- j. y/ '. *- '-"* ' '' f J; . ''*- ,' . *< ~  i g o. * " . ... - 6 ! . . ! . ;.. ,. Jago. How. now? .wh at do-yo. jbi.ere lone?, . Emil. Do not you chide; I have a thing for you. Jago. You have a thing for me b It is a common thing--- A/md. Ha? Jago. To have a foolish wife. Emil. Oh, is that all: what will you give me now: For that fame handkerchief? . .1. Jago.. What handkerchief? : ,iSmil. What handkerchief? Why, that the Mbor firh gave to Defdemona . That which so often you did bid me hteal.. Jago. Haa itollen it from her ? . AEmil. No; but (he let it drop by negligence, And to th' advantage, I being here, took't up: Look, here 'tis. Jago. A good wench, give it me. *1' I '-.'~~ - '4'd? "Emil. at:. ~ ii (.
.Emil. What will you do with't, you have beeafao earnet 13 have me filch it ? Jago. Why, what is that to you? [Sinatching it. fmi. If't be not :for.fome purpose of import, Give't me again. Poor lady fhe'll run mad, When the thall lack it. Jago. Be not you known on't: I have use for it. Go, leav e -me -- [Exit ,Emilia. I will in Ca0io's lodging lore this napkin, And let him find it. Trifles light; as air . Are, to the jealous, confirmations itrong, As proofs of holy writ. This may do something. The Moor already changes with my poisons: : Dang'rous conceits are in their nature poisons, Which at the first are scarce found to diftafe; But with a little a& upon the blood, Burn like the mines of sulphur. --I did tly so. SCENE VIIi. Enter Othello. Look, where he comes! Not poppy, nor mandragora, Nor all the drowfie fyrups of the world Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep, Whidh thou hadst yesterday. Oth. Ha! false to me! Jago. Why, how now, General; no more of that. Oth. Avant, be gone; thou'ft set me on the racks I swear 'tis better to be much abus'd, Than but to know a Little. Jago. How, my lord ? Oth. What sense had I, in her flol'n hours ofluft? I faw't not, thought it not, it harm'd not me; V oL. VI. Yyy f 2his line, restored from the firfi edition, compleats the sense.
I found not CaJfio's kisses on her lips:' He thliatis1bb'd, not wancibng what.is hI'i Let him not know!vt,. inih ~ h's t rfbbl,,at alt , Jago. I am sorry tI hjea~tifa.- . .-. -- .o Oth. I had been happy, if the general catij (Pioneers and all,) had taaled hefvet . t....i. S I Biad bnthing known. Ohbi'Ow .br eVer Farewel the tranquil miind1'FTeWl rihtet/; -. Farewel the plumed troops, *and efee *g war. That make ambition vira.e! i hfaeWe1l. Farewel the neighiig fed, Iadr the fIrill .-rs The fpirit-ftirring drorm, tl' eat-literci fs ..si.1 The royal banner, -ad.iItiy . i. , Pride, pomp, and, ir~ciiRmc ;e~ite^s-it!ari.S ..- And oh you mortal engines% whb'Ctde -rdr tohoa:s Th' immortal Jovets dtiaa ilinouts iotaitrfet, Farewel! Othello's occupation's gone I Jago. Is't poffile, tiy 1tdd? Oth. Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore; Be sure of it: give me the ocular proof, [Catching hoi Or by the {iWr'ihS'f  SnRt, etefi ii iTdl, Thou hada been better haeBenh xnihih'dbg, Than answer my wak'~ ^rich. Jago. Is\r come to this ? Oth. Make me to fce't, or at the least, so prdve it,. That the pr6badfln 1'Beir Vb hftfige, taor'l6p, To hang a rffbirt"n: 'iv6n r rek' dft'ffe! Jag0o My noble lord-- Oth. If thou dofft lander her, and tritaienre, Never pray more ; abandon all remorse; On horrors 'iehd, lrri3's: Cuinteir; Do deeds to mnake:herivon'veep, all earth'amiaz'~d; S i~ian's, hi ihe:fihii vdffldn. ~dobn h7im. For
For nothing canst thou to daq^^^^4> ; " .'" ,' Greater than that. ' Jago. Oh grace9 <qh-ia)|*afl'pa|( I Are you are a man? 'haTe -y^i ^ $bpj iporA-rfeF f God be wi' you: take ripe o .fice, Wr F}fDif^ 4, . That g liv'ft to make thine i..efty -a vice: Oh monstrous world !- -tak no.te tf i0tie, pl.g ^t9fi, To be dire& and honefg. ^ not' fe. - I thank you for this pr ofrt,:. .a} f ro'hance I'll love no friend, sith love breeds h. . . pfe-ce. Oth. Nay stay-- thou fl:Quld'ft1b bhpi t-- Jago. I should be wife, fir io9i~efty a fpoSqi,: And loses what it works for. , . Oth. By the world, I think my wife is honeM, and think (he is'noQt; I think that thou art jufi, apd .hjk thou rt not; I'll have some proof; ...t.... ..at : as. s f .ci As Dian's visage, is now begrimnd and blac As mine own face. If.her e *e C9rds o9 k9iyes, Poison, or fire, or fuffocating ^team?, I'll not endure't. Woauld I were fatisflcd! Jago. I fee Sir, you are eaten up v~ith passion; I do repent me that I put it to you. You would be satisfied ? Oth. Would? nay, and 'will. Jago. And may; but how 2 how fartisfied, my lord : Would you ' be supervisor, grqfly gape pn? Behold her topp'd? Oth. Death and damnation! oh! Jago. It were a tedious difficulty, 1 thinlk, To bring 'em to .lbat profpe&: damn them then, If ever mortal eyes do fee them bolster More than their own. What then ? how .then ? Yy y z E love/ft. 4: this fpcecb not in the first edit. h my name i the fuper-z I' * What '{iion. .  I
It is impoflible you fhoildfWfthi ,1 " ,: ; Were they as primeas goats, -as hot:a monkeys,' '" ; o,', ','.." "''-" . "". " '"' : ? + ,r,. As salt as wolves in-pinfe, -add d iols-as grofis . '," :" As ignorance diaeAirrniK. Bi, t yet, I ifay,  * If imputatioti aind: ftiong' cir'cdrff~ifices " Which lead dire&ly to MI dbdrodf thith, Will give you fatisfaStion, you mignt hyeave't. 0th. Give me a living reaifon fhe's diftoyal. o Jago. Ido not likcethe'ioffice; ". - But sith I'm entred in this cause o far, .. : Prick'd to't by' ft iffiu~eftaM ,ov4 - ! ^ - *'' I will go on. I lay with Cafflo latfely,-'' c. " ' . And being troubled' 'with a rgin tooth, I couldnotfleep---"- ' : " -5 ,/, There are a kind of men, so loose of foul r ( , :.' That in their fleepswi&i .i.t t1ieaffair- ." '" '.: A One of this kind is Cafflo' ' . r' In sleep I heard him fay, Sweet Defdemouna, : Let us be wary, let us hide our loves . And then, Sir, would he gripe, and wring my ha nd ' Cry-- oh sweet creature! arid then kiTs me hard, As if he pluckt up kisses by the roots And grew upon my lips; then lay his leg Over my thigh, and sigh and kiss, and then Cry, curfedfate! that gave thee to the Moor. Oth. Oh monstrous ! monstrous! Jago. This was but his dream. Oth. But this denoted a fore-gone eonclufibon, "Tis a fbrewd doubt, tho' it be but a dreim. ' Jago. And this may help to thicken other proofsf: That do demonstrate thinly. Oth. I'll tear her alt to peices.. 7a0o.
Jago, Nay but be wife L y-r , fye 99thmg 4PDe;. Lr She may be honest yet. Tell me-but i.d, :, , - Have you not fgqmetrines feet a handkerchief, Spotted with strawberries, -in yQr~ wife's iand? - Oth. I gave her fuch'aone; 'Icas my firtigift. sago. I know not that; but such a handkerchieif, (I'm sure it was your wife's,) did1 to-day See Caf/io wipe his beard with. ~ Oth. If it be that--- --- , sago. If it be that, or any, if 'twas:hers" It speaks against her with the other proofs. Oth. Oh that the slave had forty;thoufaad lives! One is too poor, too weak for my revenge. Now do I fee 'tis true. ---Look here, Jago, All my fond love thus do I blow :to heav'n: 'Tis gone;--- -- , . , Arise black vengeance ,fom the hollow hbell Yield up, oh love, thy crown and hiearted throne To tyrannous hate! swell bosom with thy fraught, For 'tis of afpicks tongues, sago. Yet be content. Oth. Oh blood, blood, blood---. 7ago. Patience I fay;i your mind may change. Oth. Never, Jago. : Like the Pontick sea, Whose icy current and compulsive course, Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on To the Propontick, and the Hellelpont: Even so my bloody thoughts with violent pace Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love, 'Till that a capable and wide revenge Swallow them up---- Now by yond marble heav'n, In the due rev'rence of a sacred vow; [He I here engage my words ---. ST'bis simile is omitted in the first edition: I think it Should be so, as an u rural excursion in this place. kneels. 7ago. ,ma- J f~ ~Lii St ~~ ~i
/ago. Do no? n ~ : ^ i . -. . ,, ,rJygo 4*,ekw Witness you ever-burning Jigs hove! .b, .i You elements that clip us round abot !, Witness, that here Jago doth giygup , The execution of hbis wit, bajds, heari, To wrong'd Othello'sfervice. Ln Iim . c Wo adQd k Not to obey shall be in me rgnmr. , What bloody bufinels ever. Oth. I greet thy love, Not with vain thanks bat wish accptance hI^p $p And will upon the inftao pu the zo't: Within there three days l. me hear tb.ee iy That Cafio's not alive. Jago. My friend is dead; 'Tis done at your recqeit. But let her Lyve, :,, . Oth. Damn her, lewd minxt! oh damn her, dainPhJqq r Come go with me apart, I will withr. , ,, To furnimh me wit/l rome swift mneap.s Qfdeit For the fair devil. Now art thou .my lieutenant. Jago. I am your own for ever. 4[yke . SCENE *X. Enter Defdemona, .nEmilia, and Clown. Def. 0O you know, irrah, where lieutepanrt CJio lyes? Clown. I dare snot fay he lies any where. Def. Why man ? Clown. He's a soldier, and for meto fay a foldijr!is, 'tis.fabing. Def. Go to; where lodges he ? Clown. To tell you where he lodges, is to xtld you where I l[e. Def. Can any thing be made of this? Clown. I know not where be lodges; and for .-e ,tp.:dejfe,a lodging, and fay he lyes here, or.helyes.there, ,w,ee,o.iie ri nmine own txroat. Def k and to obey.
Clown. I will catechize ihit 's lid for him, that is makeli questions, and by them answer. Def. Seek him, bid him ch% hihei3 tell him, I have mov'd my lord on hi b half a&d ;hpe ali till be well. Clown. iodo tibs i iitheit kt e rcbmpd~i odT ft-n'$ wit, and therefore I will attempt tfhe dolag of t. [&it Clown. Def. Wher:fhfe d 4l fe fth hatadketidf .tmfliit,? A.mil. I know not, madam. Def Believe' m, "1 had 1Thti~r hlave loft my pirfe Full of cruzadoes. And bat mp tiBcfc MoorK Is true of mind, and made of no such baifenaf As jealous creatures are, it were enough To put him to ill thinking. Emil. Is he not jealous? Def. Who he? I think the Sun where he was burn Drew all such humours from him, .Amil. Look where ihe ,coties. Def. I will not leave him row, 'il1 affo be Cail'd to him. How is it wiaih you, 'my lord? S CE N E X. Enter Othello. Oth. Well, my good'lady. Oh hardness to dissemble! How do you, Defdemuna? Def. Well, my lord. Oth. Give me your hand; "this hand is moifi, my lady. Def. It yet hath felt no age, noriknown no'forrow. Oth. This argues :ruitfulnefs, and liberal heart: Hot, hot, and moif t---this hand of yours requires A sequester from liberty; fasting and prayer, Much castigation, exercise devogu, For
For here's a young and (weating devil here, That commonly rebels: 'tis a good hand, A frank one. Def. You may, indeed, fay so; For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart. Oth. A liberal hand. The hearts of old, gave hands; But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts. Def. I cannot speak of this; come, now your promise. Oth. What promise, chuck ? Def. I've sent to bid Caflo come speak with you. Oth. I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me; Lend me thy handkerchief. Def. Here, my lord. Oth. That which I gave you. Def. I have it not about me. Oth. Not?-- Def. No indeed, my lord. Oth. That's a fault. That handkerchief Did an lEgyptian to my mother give; She was a charmer, and could almoff read The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it, 'Twould make her amiable, subdue my father Intirely to her love; but if she loft it Or made a gift of it, my father's eye Should hold her loathed, and his spirits hunt After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me, And bid me, when my fate would have me wiv'd, To give it her. I did so, and take heed on'r ; Make it a darling like your precious eye; To loofe't or give't away, were such perdition As nothing else could match. Def. Is't poffible?l Oth. 'Tis true; there's mnagick in the web of it;
A Sybill that had numbred in'4it WOrw . .4\ ^ ~) ; JT . The fun to course two hpod4r~ed:qpj pae ; > ,; U ; ..j; J In her prophetick fury fow'd the work: . . The worms were hallowed, that idbrfadAtJe filc 0 . And it was dy'd in m mnieyi whicsh the -: ;S k,., ,':, Confetrv'd :fnmaidens hearts. Def Indeed! is't true!., , , : Oth. Mfit eritable, therefore looktpo'^wfjL . ,. Def Then would to heav'n, that:-li had neverifeei't.;/ - 0th. Ha? wherefob e. ,. ,r,:-., -^>,, , . .*> * , .' :(:" Def. Why do yoaufpea4fQkrinfatgly,r and rafli , , Oth. Is't loft? is't gone? speak, is it -qut QI way, ,., ,- r def: Bless usl.--. , Oth. Say you? , Def It is not loft; but what aadiifit were? .... Oth. Ha! -, Def. I fay it is not lope. ;,.,= , Oth. Fetch't, let me: fee't.^ : .. ? i-- Def. Why so I can, Sir, hut I will not now: This is a trick to put me from my fair, , Pray you letr Cq//io be receiv'd again. Oth. Fetch me the handkerchief---my mind misgives-- Def. Come, you'll ne'er meet a more fufficient man. Oth. The handkerchief--. Def. A man that all his time Hath founded his good fortunes on your love; Shar'd dangers with you. Oth. The handkerchief---. Def. Infooth you are to blame. Oth. Away. [Exit Othe"lo. r,, vI Zzz S C E SC E c g v u 1-1 
SCENE XI. Manent Defdemona and &Emilia. Emik. Is not this man jealous ? Def. I ne'er saw this before. Sure there's fume wonder in this handkerchief: I'm most unhappyr in the loss of it. AiEmil. 'Tis not a year or two shews us a man. They are but floromachs, and we all but food, They eat us hungerly, and when they're full They belch us. Lodk you! Cafio, sand my- husband.. Enter Jago, and Caffio. Jago. There is no other way, 'tis (he mufR &b'r; And lo, the happiness! go and importune her. Def. How now, good Caffio, what's the news with you:? Caf Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you, That by your virtuous means, I may again Exist, and be a member of his love, v horn I, with all the office of my :heart Intirely honour. I wouild not be 'delay'd; If my offence beoffuch mortal kind, That not my service past, nor present sorrows, Nor purpos'd merit in futurity, Can ranfobm me into his love again; But to know so, mufit be my benefit; So (hall I cloath me in a forc'd content, And (hut my seif up in some other course, To fortune's arms. Def. Alas! thrice gentle Caio, My advocation is not now in tune; My
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him, Were he in favour, as in humour alter'd. So help me every spirit fan6tified, As I have spoken for you all my belft, And stood within the blank of his displeasure For my free speech. You must a-while be patient; What I can do, I will: and more I will Than for my self I dare. Let that fuiLffice you. Jago. Is my lord angry? ami. He went hence but now; And certainly in strange unquietness. Jago. Can he be angry ? I have seen the cannon, When it hath blown his ranks into the air, And like the devil from his very arm Puft his own brother; and can he be angry ? Something of moment then; I will go meet him, There's matter in'c indeed, if he be angry. [Exit. S C E NE XII. Manent Defdemona, /Emilia, and Caffio. Def. I pr'ythee do so. Something sure of slate, Either from Jenice, or some unhatch'd praAice, Made here demonfitrable in Cyprus to him, Hath pudled his clear spirit; and in fuchcafes, Mcns natures wrangle with inferior things, Tho' great ones are their obje&. 'Tis ev'n so. For let our finger ake, and it endues Our other healthful members with a sense Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not Gods, Nor of them look for such obCf.rvance always, As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, mdlia, I wvas, unhandsome warrior as I am, Zzz . Ar-
Arraigning his unkindness with my foul; But now I find, I had fuborn'd the witness, And he's indited falsely. AmiL Pray heav'n it be State-matter, as you think, and no conception Nor jealous toy concerning you. Def. Alas-the-day, I never give him cause. AEmil. But jealous fouls will not be anfwer'd so; They are not ever jealous for a cause, But jealous, for they're jealous. It's a monster Begot upon it fel, born_.on it seif. Def Heav'n keep that monster from Othello's mind! Amil. Lady, amen. Def. I will go seek him. Ca]JIo, walk hereabout; If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit, And seek t' effec' it to my uttermofi. Caf I humbly thank your ladyship. [Ex. Defdem. S C"E N E and tEmil. XIII. Enter Bianca. Bian. 'Save you, friend Caff/o. Caf. What makes you from home? How is it with you, my moil fair Bianca ? Indeed, sweet love, I was coming to your house. Bian. And I was going to your lodging, CafJio. ' What ? keep a week away? seven days and nights?  Eightfcore eight hours? and lover's absent hours, ' More tedious than the dial, eightfcore times ? 6 Oh weary reck'ning! Caf. Pardon me, Bianca: I have this while with leaden thoughts been press, But I shall in a more convenient time Strike * continuate.
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca, [Giving her befdiemona's Handkerchief. Take me this work out. Bian. Oh Caffio, whence came this? This is fbme token from a newer friend: Of thy felt absence, now I feel a cause.: Is't come to this? well, well. Caf. Go to, woman Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth, From whence you have them. You are jealous now That this is from some mistress, rome remembrance ? No, in good troth, Bianca. Bian. Why, whose is it ? Caf. I know not neither; I found it in my chamber i;. I like the work well; ere it be demanded, As like enough it will, I'd have it copied: Take it, and do't, and leave me for this time.. Bian. Leave you? wherefore? Caf I do attend here on the General, . And think it no addition, nor my wish. To have him fee me woman'd. Bizan. Why, I pray you ? Caf Not that I love you not, Bian. But that you do not love me;, I pray you bring me on the way a little, And fay, if I shall fee you soon at night.? Caf. 'Tis but a little way that I can bring you, For I attend here. But I'll fee you loon. Bian. 'Tis very good; I must be circuamftanc'd.. [Exeunt. ACT
- * ACT IV. SCENE A Rome of State. Enter Othello, and Jago. J A G 0. ^ ' ILL you think fob Oth. Think so, 7ago? W Jago. What, to kiss in private? Oth. An unanthoriz'd kis ? S ago. Or to be naked with her friend An hour or more, not meaning any h Oth. Naked in bed, Jiago, and not mean harm ? ' It is hypocrifie against the devil: ? They that mean virtuoutly, and yet do so, SThe devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heavln. 3'ago. If they do nothing, 'tis a venial flip: But if I give my wife a handkerchief---- Oth. W hat then ? Jago. Why then, 'tis her's, my lord, and being hers She may, I think, befrow'r on any man. Oth. She is protedrefs of her honour too; May the give that Jago. Her honour is an effenoce that's not seen, They have it vefy '6t, t~ihat :have it not. But for the handkerchief---- Oih. By heav'n I would most gladly have forgot it; Thou faidf, --. oh, it comes o'er my memory, As doth the raven o'er th' infedted house, in bed, arm? Boading ;^
Boading to all, --he had my handkerchief. Jago. Ay, what of that? Oth. That's not so good now. Jago. What if I said, I'adfeen'irn do you Wrng? Or heard him fay, as knaves be such abroad, Who having by their own importunate suit, Or voluntary dotage of Come mistress, Convinced or supplied them, cannot chjfe But they must blab. Oth. Hath he said any thing? Jago. He hath, my lord; but be you well affur'd, No more than he'll unswear. Oth. What hath he said ? Jago. Why, that he did--T .'know not what he dii:d---- Oth. What? what ' Jago. Lye---. Oth. With her? Jago. With her? on her---- what you wilt--- Othb. Lye with her! lye on her! lye with her! that's flWfomn: handkerchief---- Confeflions ------ Handkerchief.--- " I tremble at it------Nature would not invest her self in such shadowing without rome inftrution. It is not wtords that ihake me thus --. pish ---- Noses, ears, and lips-..--- is't possible ---conifes !---- handkerchief ---- Oh devil ------ [Falls in a Trance, Jago. WVork on, My medicine works! thus credulous fools are caught; And many worthy and chaft dames even thus All guiltless meet reproach. What hoa! my lord! My lord, I fay, Othello. * Handkerchief-- to confess, and be hang'd for his labour------Firft, to be hang'd, and then to confess --- No hint of this trajh in the ift edit. SCENE
SCENE Enter Caffio. II. H-ow now, Cajflo? Caf. What's the matter ? Jago. My lord is fain into an epilepfie, This is the second fit; he had one yesterday. Caf. Rub him about the temples. Jago. No, forbear, The lethargy mufl have his quiet course; If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by Breaks out to savage madness: -- look, he tlirs. Do you withdraw your seif a little while, He will recover firaight; when he is gone, I would on great occasion speak with you. [Exit Caflio. How is it, General ? have you not hurt your head ? Oth. Dost thou mock me ? Jago. I mock you not, by heav'n; Would you would bear your fortune like a man. Oth. A horned man's a monifer and a bealf. Jago. There's many a beast then in a populous city, And many a civil monfler. Oth. Did he confers it? Jago. Good Sir, be a man: Think every bearded fellow that's but yoak'd May draw with you. Millions are now alive, That nightly lye in those unproper beds, Which they dare swear peculiar. Your cafe is better. Oh, 'tis the fpight of hell, the fiend's arch-mock, To lip a wanton in a secure couch; And to suppose her chaff. No, let me know, And knowing what I am, I know what (he flall be. Oth. Oh, thou art wife; 'tis certain. Jago.
Jago. Stand you a while apart, Confine your self but in a patient lift. Whilst you were here, o'er-whelmed with your grief (A pafHion most a unfitting such a man) Cafloi came hither. I shifted him away, And laid good 'fcufes on your ecftafie; Bad him anon return, and here speak with me; The which he promis'd. Do but encave your self, And mark the fleers, the gibes and notable scorns, That dwell in every region of his face. For I will make him tell the tale anew; Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when He hath, and is again to cope your wife. I fay, but mark his gefhiure. Marry patience, Or I ihall fay you're all in all in spleen, And nothing of a man.. Oth. Dolt thou hear, Jago, I will be found most cunning in my patience; But, dolt thou hear, most bloody. rago. That's not amis; But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw? [Othello zwithdraws, Now will I queffion Ca/io of Bianca, A hufwife, that by felling her desires, Buys her self bread and cloth. It is a creature That dotes on Caffo, as 'tis the fitrumpet's plague To beguile many, and be beguil'd by one 5 He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain From the excess of laughter. Here he comes. VOL. VL a resulting. A aaa SCENE .I
S C E N E IlI. Enter Caftio. As he shall smile, Othello (hall go mad; And his unbooki(h jealoufie must conitrue Poor CaJo's smiles, gestures and light behaviour Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant.? Caf The worser, that you gave me the addition, Whose want even kills me. Jago. Ply Defdemnona well, and you are sure on't; Now, if this fute lay in Biawca's b power, [Speaking lower. How quickly (hould you speed ? Caf. Alas, poor caitiff. Oth. Look how he laughs already. Jago. I never knew a woman love man so. Caf. Alas, poor rogue, I think indeed (he loves me. Oth. Now he denies it faintly, and laughs out. Jgao. Do you hear, Cafio? Oth. Now he importunes him To tell it o'er: go to, well said, well said. Jago. She gives it out, that you (hall marry her. Do you intend it? Cal. Ha, ha, ha. Oih. Do ye triumph, Roman? do you triumph? Caf. I marry! -- What? a customer ? pr'ythee bear fbme cha- rity to my wit, do not think it so unwholfome. Ha, ha, ha. Oth. So, so: they laugh that win. Jago. Why, the cry goes, that you (hall marry her. Caf. Pr'ythce fay true. jago. I am a very villain else. Oth. Have you fcoar'd me? well. Ca. d ower,
Ca. This is the monkey's own giving out: (he isperfwaded I will marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise. Oth. Jago beckons me: now he begins the flory. Caf. She was here even now; (he haunts me in every place. I was the other day talking on the tea bank with certain J/enetians, and thither comes the bauble, and falls me thus about my neck- Oth. Crying, oh dear Caffi;o, as it were: his gesture imports it. Caf. So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me, so ihakes, and pulls me. HIa, ha, ha--- Oth. Now he tells how she pluckt him to my chamber: oh, I fee that nose of yours, but not chat dog I {hall throw it to. Caf. Well, I must leave her company. Jago. Before me; look where (he comes. S C EN. E IV. Enter Bianca. Caf 'Tis such another f fitchew! marry, a perfum'd one: What do you mean by this haunting of me? Bian. Let the devil and his damn haunt you i what did you mean by that fame handkerchief you gave me even now ? I was a fine fool to take it: I mufft take out the work? a likely piece of work, that you should find it in your chamber, and know not who left it there. This is some minxe's token, and I must take out the work? there, give it your hobbey-horfe: wheresoever you had it, I'll take out no work onrt. Caf. How now, my sweet Bianca ? how now? how now? Oth. By heaven, that should be my handkerchief. Bian. If you'll come to supper to-night, you may; if you will not, come when you are next prepar'd for. [Exit. Jago. Aftecr her, after her. CaJ. I muff, (he'll rail in the streets else. A a aa z Jago. Fitchew, a pole-cat.
Jago. Will you sup there? Calf Yes, I intend so. Jago. Well, I may chance to fee you; for I would very fain speak with you. Caf Pr'ythee come, will you ? Jago. Go to, fay no more. [Exit Caffio, S C E N E Manent Othello and Jago. Oth. How shall I murther him, Jago? Jago. Did you perceive how he laugh'dat his vice?. Oth. Oh, Jago!--. Jago. And did you fee the handkerchief?: Oth. Was that mine? Jago. Yours, by this hand: and to ee how he prizes the foolish woman your wife .-- She gave it him, and he hath given it his whore. Oth. I would have him nine years a killing: A fine woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman! --. Jago. Nay, youa muff forget that. Oth. Ay, let her rot and perimh, and be damn'd to-night, for fie fhiall not live. No, my heart is turn'd to Itone: I firike it and it hurts my hand. Oh, the world hath not a sweeter crea- ture .-- She might lye by an emperor's fide, and command him tasks. J/ago. Nay, that's not your way. Oth. Hang her, I do but fay what ibe is- -so delicate with her needle --An admirable musician. Oh, (he will sing the savageness out of a bear: osso high and plenteous wit and invention ! Jago. She's the worse for all this. Oth. Oh, a thousand, a thousand times: And then of so gentle condition! ---. Jago. Ay, too gentle.. -' Oth. Nay, that's certain. But
But yet the pity of it, Jago--- Oh, Jago, the pity of it, /ago-- Jago. If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend; for if it touch not you, it comes near no body. Oth. I will chop her into meffles: cuckold me! Jago. Oh, 'tis foul in her. Oth. With mine officer!. Jago. That's fouler. Oth. Get me some poison, J7ago, this night. I'll not expoft- late with her, left her body and her beauty unprovide my mind again: this night, Jago. Jago. Do it not with poison, itrangle her in her bed, Even in the bed she hath contaminated. Oth. Good, good: The justice of it pleases; very good. Jago. And for CaJjio, leet- me be his undertaker-: You shall hear more by midnight. S C E N E VI Enter Lodovico, Defdemona, and Attendants. Oth. Excellent good-- what trumpet is that fame?. Jago. 1 warrant something from veuice. 'Tis Lodovico; this comes from the Duke. See, your wife's with him. Led. Save you, worthy General. Oth. With all my heart, Sir. Lod. The Duke and the senators of Jenice greet you. [Gives him a Letter. Oth. I kiss the inftrurnent of their pleasures. Def. And what's the news, good cousin LEdovico? Jago. I am very glad to fee you, signior. Welcome to Cyprus. Lod. I thank you; how does lieutenant CaJffio? Jago.
Sago. Lives, Sir, Def. Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord An unkind breach: bue you (hall make all well. Oth. Are you sure of that ? Def. My lord. Oth. This fail you not to do, as you will---- Lod. He did not call; he's bufie in the paper. Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cafflo ? Def.. A mofl unhappy one; I would do much T' atone them, for the love I bear to Caffo. Oth. Fire and brimfione! Deft My lord! Oth. Are you wife? Def. What, is he angry? Lod. May be the letter mov'd him. For as I think they do command him home, Deputing Caio in his government. Def. Trust me, I am glad on't. Oth. Indeed! Def. My lord! Oth. I am glad to fee you mad. Def. Why, sweet Othello? Oth. Devil! Def. I have not deferv'd this. Lod. My lord, this would not be believ'd in Venice, Though I should swear I faw't. 'Tis very much, Make her amends, the weeps. Oth. Oh devil, devil! If that the earth could eeem with woman's tears, Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile : Out of my fight -. Def. I will not stay t' offend you. [Going. Lod. Truly an obedient lady:
I do beseech your lord (hip call her back, Oth. Mistress. Def. My lord. Oth. What would you with her, Sir ? Lod. Who I, my lord ? Oth. I! you did wish that I.would make her turn: Sir, she can turn and turn, and yet go on, And turn again. And flhe can weep, Sir, weep; And (he's obedient: as you fay obedient, Very obedient----proceed you in your tears--. Concerning this, Sir,---oh well painted pafioen!-- I am commanded home----get you away, I'll fend for you anon -- Sir, I obey the mandate, And will rerurn to Venice--- Hence, avant! -- Ca~fo shall have my place. And, Sir, to-night I do entreat that we may sup together. You are welcome, Sir, to Cyprus--- Goats and Monkies! [Exit Defd. [Exit. SCENE VII. M;anent Lodovico, and Jago. Lod. Is this the noble Moor, whom our full senate Call all-in-all fufficient? this the nature Which passion could not shake? whose solid virtue The (hot of accident nor dart of chance Could neither graze nor pierce? Jago. He is much chang'd. Lod. Are his wits safe? is he not of light brain? Jfgo. He's what he is; I may not breathe my censure. What he might be, if what he might he is nor, I would to heav'n he were. Locd. \What, strike his wife! 7ago..
Jago. 'Faith that was not so well; yet would I knew That stroke would prove the worst. Lod. Is it his use ? Or did the letters work upon .his blood, And new-create this fault? sago. Alas, alas! It is not honesty in me to speak What I have seen and known. You fhal observe him, .And his own courses will denote him so, That I may save my speech. Do but go after, And mark how he continues. Lod. I'm sorry that I am deceiv'd in him. [Exeunt. .S CENE VIII. Ain Apartment. Enter Othello and iEmilia. 'Oth. VJ 0 U have seen nothing then ? JL _ Emil Nor ever heard, nor ever did fufpeA. Oth. Yes, you have seen Caffilo and her together. jEamil. But then I saw no harm; and then I heard 'Each syllable that breath made up between them. Oth. What? did they never whisper? jAmil. Never, my lord. Oth. Nor fend you out o' th' way? AEmil. Never. -Oth. To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing? Lmd. Never, my lord. Oth. That's fItrange! l4mil. I durst, my lord, to wager she is honefi, Lay down my foul at sPake; if you think other, Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch hath put this in your head, Let heav'n requite it with the ferpent's curse; For if he be not honeflt, chaft and true, There's no man happy, the purest of their wives Is foul as slander. Oth. Bid her come hither, go. She says enough; yet fhe's a firmple bawd That cannot fay as much. This is a subtle whore, A clofet-lock and key of villanous secrets; And yet ihe'll kneel, and pray; I've seen her do't. S C ENE IX. Enter Defdemona and -Emilia. Def. My lord, what is your will? Oth. Pray you, chucks come hither. Def. What is your pleasure ? Oth. Let me fee your eyes. look in my face. Def. What horrible fancy's this? Oth. Some of your fan<ion, miflrefs, Leave procreants alone,. and (hut the door, Cough, or cry hem, if any body come. Your mystery, your myflery; nay dispatch. [Exit Emilia. Def Upon my knee, what doth your speech import ? I understand a fury in your words, * But not your words. Oth. Why ? what art thou? Deft Your wife, my lord; your true and loyal wife. Oth. Come swear it; damn thy seif; left being like one Ofheav'n, the devils themselves should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double damn'd; swear thou art honest. Deft Heav'n doth truly know it. Oth. Heav'n truly knows, Vo L. VI. Bbbb That 4 'his line is added out of the fir.7 edition [Exit Emilia.
That thou art false as hell. Def. To whom,_my-lord ? With whom ? how am I false? Oth. Ah, Defdemon, away, away, away-. Def. Alas the heavy day! why do you weep : Am I the motive of there tears, my lord: If haply you my father do fufpe& An instrument of this your calling back, Lay not your blame on me; if you've loft him, Why I have loft him too. Oth. Had it pleas'd heav'n To try me with affliiion, had he rain'd All kind of sores and shames on my bare head, Steep'd me in poverty to the very lips, Giv'n to captivity me and my hopes;, I should have found in Come place of my foul A drop of patience. But alas, to make me A fixed figure for the hand of scorn To point his flow and moving finger at---- Yet could I bear that too, well, very well. But there where I have garner'd up my heart, Where either I must live,, or bear no life, The fountain from the which my current runs, Or elf: dries up; to be discarded thence; Or keep it as a cistern, for foul toads To knot and gender in. Turn thy complexion there, Patience, thou young and rofe-lipp'd cherubin; I here look grim as hell. Def. I hope my noble lord esteems me honeff. Oth. Oh ay, as fummer-flies are in the shambles, That quicken ev'n with blowing. Oh thou weed! Who art so lovely fair, and fmell'ft so fweer, That the sense akes at thee --. Would thou had'flt ne'er been born! De/.
Def) Alas, what ignorant fin have I committed : Oth. Was this fair paper, this molt goodly book, Made to write whore upon? What, committed? Committed? Oh, thou publick commoner! I ihould make very forges of my cheeks, That would to cynders burn up modefly, Did but I speak thy deeds. What, committed? Heav'n stops the nose at it, and the moon winks; The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets, Is hufh'd within the hollow mine~of earth And will not hear't. What, committed?--. Def. By heav'n, you do me wrong. Oth. Are not you a firumpet? Def. No, as I am a chriflian. If to preserve this vessel for my lord From any other foul unlawful touch, Be not to be a strumpet, I am none. Oth. What, not a whore ? Def. No, as I shall be saved. Oth. Is't possible? Def. Oh heav'n forgive us. Oth. I cry you mercy, then. I took you for that cunning whore of Tenice, That married with Othello --. SCENE X. Enter AEmilia. You mistress, That have the office opposite to Saint Peter, And keep the gate of hell; You ! you! ay you ! We have done our course, there's mony for your pains; I pray you turn the key, and keep our counsel. [Exit. Bbbb 2z miL
,Emil. Alas, what does this gentleman conceive? How do you, madam? how do you, my good lady ? Def. Faith, halfafleep. Emil. Good madam, what's the matter with my lord? Def. With whom ? A4mil. Why, with my lord, madam ? Def. Who is thy lord ? .rmirl. He that is yours, sweet lady. Def. I have none; do not talk to me, 2milia, I cannot weep; nor answer have I none, But what should go by water. Pray to-night Lay on my bed my wedding sheets, remember And call thy husband hither. A2mul. Here's a change indeed! [Exhit. Deft 'Tis meet I should be us'd so, very meet: How have I been behav'd, that he might flick The fmall'ft opinion of my leafs mifuaf ? SCENE XI. Enter Jago and tEmilia. Jago. What is your pleasure, madam? how is't wish you. Def I cannot tell; thole that do teach your babes, Do it with gentle means, and eafie tasks; He might have chid me so: for in good faith I am a child to chiding. ago. What's the matter, lady? Zjimil. Alas, Jago, my lord hath so bewhor'd her, Thrown such defpight and heavy terms upon her That true hearts cannot bear it. Def. Am I that name, Jago? Jago. What name, fair lady ? Def. Such as she said my lord did fay I was. irmzl.
tEmil. He call'd her whore; a beggar, in his drink, Could not have laid such terms upon his caller. Jago. Why did he so ? Def. I do not know; I'm sure I am none such. 2ago. Do not weep, do not weep; alas the day! AIjmil. Hath the forbfook so many noble matches ? Her father ? and her country ? and her friends ? To be call'd whore ? would it not make one weep.? Def. It is my wretched fortune. Jago. Beshrew him for't how comes this trick upon I Def. Nay, heav'n doth know. AEmil. I will be hang'd if some eternal villain, Some bufie and insinuating rogue, Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office, Has not devis'd this slander: I'll be hang'd else. Jago. Fie, there is no such man; it is impoflible. Def. If any fich there be, heav'n pardon him. lEmiL A halter pardon him, and bell gnaw his bones. Why should he call her whore? who keeps her company-? What place? what time? what form ? what likely-hood ? The Moor's abus'd by fbme most villanous knave, Some bate notorious knave, some scurvy fellow. Oh heav'n, that such companions thou'dft unfold, And put in every honest hand a whip, To lash the rascal naked through the world, Ev'n from the eaf to th' weft! Jago. Speak within door. Aifmil. Oh fie upon them! Some fich 'fquire he was That turn'd your wit the seamy fide without, And made you to fufpet me with the Moor. Jago. You are a fool; go to. Def. Alas, Jago. What shall I do to win my lord again. Gcod ~insP~~
Good friend, go to him; by this light of heav'n, I know not how I loft him. Here I kneels [Kneeing. If e'er my will did trespass 'gainft his love, Or in discourse, or thought, or a&tual deed; Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense Delighted them on any other form; Or that I do not yet, and ever did, And ever'will, though he do shake me off To beggarly divorcement, love him dearly, Comfort forswear mel Unkindness may do much, And his unkindness may defeat my life, But never taint my love. I can't fay whore, It do's abhor me now I speak the word ; To do the at, that might th' addition earn, Not the world's mats of vanity could make me. Jago. I pray you be content; 'tis but his humour; The business of the state do's him offence, And he does chide with you. Deft If'twere no other--. Jago. It is but so, I warrant. Hark how these inltruments summon to Cupper! [Trumpets. The meifTenger of /enice slays the meat; Go in, and weep noti all things {hall be well. [Exeunt Defdemona and kEmilia. SCENE XII. Enter Rodorigo. How now, Rodorigo? Rod. I do not find that thou deal'ft jufltIly with me. Jago. What in the contrary? Rod. Every day thou doft'ft me with Come deviCe Jago, and ra- ther, as it seems to me now, keep'fl from me all conveniency, than
than fuppliefi me with the least advantage of hope. I will indeed no longer endure it. Nor am I yet perfwaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly fuffer'd. Jago. Will you hear me, Rodorigo ? Rod. I have heard too much; and your words and performan- ces are no kin together. Jago. You charge me moftll unjufily. Rod. With nought but truth: I have wallfted my self out of my means. The jewels you have had from me to deliver to Def- demona, would half have corrupted a Votarist You have told me she hath receiv'd them, and return'd me expe&ations and comforts of sudden refpe& and acquaintance, but I find none. Jago. Well, go to; very well. Rod. Very well, go to; I cannot go to, man, nor'tis notve- ry well; nay, I think it is scurvy; and begin to find my seif fob'd in it. Jago. Very well. Rod. I tell you, 'tis not very well. I will make my seif known to Defdemona: If the will return me my jewels, I will give over my suit, and repent my unlawful solicitation: if not, aflfure your self I will seek fatisfa(tion of you, Jago. You have laid now. Rod. Ay, and said nothing but what I protefi intendment of doing. Jago. Why, now I fee there's mettle in thee; and even from this inflant do I build on thee a better opinion thaa ever before. Give me thy hand, Rodorigo, thou haflt taken against me a mofE just exception; but I proteflt I have dealt moif directlyin thy affair. Rod. It hath not appear'd. Jago. I grant indeed it hath not appear'd; and your suspicion is not without wit and judgment. But, Rodorngo, if thou haft that in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than
than ever (I mean, purpose, courage, and valour) this nightfhew it. If thou the next night following enjoy not Defdemona, take me from this world with treachery, and devise engines for my life. Rod. Well; what is it? is it within reason and compass? Jago. Sir, there is especial commission come from Fenice to depute Ca/Jio in Othello's place. Rod. Is that true. why then Othelle and Defdemona return a- gain to Venice. Jago. Oh noi he goes into Mauritania, and taketh away with him the fair Defdemona, unleifs his abode be lingred here by some accident. Wherein none can be so determinate, as the removing of Cajio. Rod. How do you mean removing him? Jago. Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's place; knocking out his brains. Rod. And that you would have me to do? sago. Ay, if you dare do your felif a profit, and a right. He fups to-night with a harlot ; and thither will I go to him. He knows not yet of his honourable fortune; if you will watch his going thence (which I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure. I will be near to fe- cond your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand not amaz'd at it, but go along with me; I will ihew you such a necessity in his death, that you (hall think your felif bound to put it on him. It is now high fupper-time; and the night grows to waste. About it. Rod. I will hear further reason for this. Jago. And you (hall be satisfied. [Exeunt. SCENE
SCENE XIII. Enter Othello, Lodovico, Defdemona, AEmilia, and Attendants. Lod. I do beseech you, Sir, trouble your self no further. Oth. Oh pardon; 'twill do me good to walk. Lod. Madam, good night; I humbly thank your ladyship. Def. Your honour is most welcome. Oth. Will you walk, Sir ? oh Defdemona /-- Def. My lord. Oth. Get you to bed on th' inflant, I will be return'd forth- with; dismiss your attendant there; look't be done. [Exit. Def. I will, my lord. AEmil How goes it now? he looks gentler than he did. Def. He slays he will return incontinent, And hath commanded me to go to bed, And bid me to dismiss you. AEmul. Dismiss me.? Def. It was hisbidding; therefore, good .Rmiia, Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu. We mufL not now displease him. /Emi I would you had never seen him. Def So would not I; my love doth so approve him, That even his ftubbornefs, his checks, his frowns, (Pr'ythee unpin me) have grace and favour in them. Aimil I have laid those Ibeets you bad me on the bed. Def. All's one: good father! how foolifih are our minds ? If I do die before thee, pr'ythee ihroud me In one of thef rae fame sheets. ZEmil. Come, come; you talk. Def. My mother had a maid call'd Barbara, She was in love, and he the lov'd prov'd mad, And did forsake her She had a song of willow, So L. VI. C c c c An
An old thing 'twas, but it exprefs'd her fortune, And the dy'd tinging it. That song to-night Will not go from my mind; I've much ado, But to go hang my head all at one tide, And sing it like poor Barbara. Pr'ythee dispatch. EAmil. Shall I go fetch your night-gown? Def No, unpin mie here; This Lodovico is a proper man. mil. A very handfom man. Def. He speaks well. Ami/. I know a lady in Venice would have walk'd bare-foot toQ Paeftine for a touch of his nether lip. Def. The poor foul fat singing by a sycamore tree, [singing. Sing all a. green wllow : Her hand on her besom, her head on her knee, Sing willow, willow, willow. The fre/h flreams ran by her, and murmtr'd her moans; Sing willow, &c. Her falk tears felt from her., and foftned the flones; Sing willow, &c. /ifillow, willow. (Pr'ythee hye thee, he'll come anon)} Sing all a green willow mufl be my garland. Let no, body blame him, his scorn I approve. lay that's not next ---- Hark who is't that knocks ~ lEmil. It's the wind. Def. I calld my love false love ; but what said he-then? Sing willow, &c. If I court more women, you'll couch with more men. So get thee gone, good-night; mine eyes do itch, Doth that boad weeping ? AEmil. 'Tis neither here nor there. Def. I have heard it said so; oh there men, these men Dost thou in conscience think, tell me /Emilia, That
That there be women do abuse their husbands In such gross kind ? ,S6mil. There be forome such, no cqueftiosn. Def. Would'ft thou do such a deed for all the worlds jmil. Why, would not you? Def. No, by this heav'nly fight. AEmil. Nor I neither by this heav'nly light, I might do't as well i'th' dark. Deft Would'fl thou do such a deed for all the world ' AEmil. The world's a huge thing; It is a great price, for a small vice. Def. In troth I think thou would'ft riot. Emr/il. In troth I think I flionid, and' undo't when I had doneC Marry, I would not do such a thing for a joint ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps; nor any petty exhibition. But for all the whole world; why, who would not make her husband a cuckold, to make him a monarcha I should venture purgatory for't. Deft Beshrew me, if I would-do fich a wrong For the whole world. .,Fmil. Why, the wTrong is bae a:wrtbng i'th' world; and ha- ving the world for your labour, 'tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right. Def. I do not think there is any tfc~r woman. .'mil. Yes, a dozen; and as many to th' vantage, as would flore the world they plaid'for. But I do think it is their husbands faltes, If wives do fall: fay, that they flack' their duties, And pour our treasures into foreign laps, Or else break out in peevish jealousies, Throwing refiraint on us; or fay they fthike us, Or scant our former having in defpight; Why we have galls, and though we-have fonre grac; Cccc , Yet
Yet have we iome revenge. Let husbands know, Their wives have sense like them; they fee and smell, And have their palats both for sweet and sower, As husbands have. What is it that they do, When they change us for others ? is it sport? I think it is; and doth affedtion breed it : I think it doth: is't fraily that thus errs ? It is so too. And have not we affe&ions ? Desires for sport ? and frailty as men have ? Then let them use us well; else let them know, The ills we do, their ills infiruct us to. Def. Good-night; good-night; heav'n me such uses fend, Not to pick bad from bad; but by bad, mend. [Exeunt. A CT V. SCEN E I. The Street. Enter Jago and Rodorigo. J A G 0. t E RE; stand behind this bulk. Straight will he come : IH Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home; Quick, quick, fear nothing; I'11 be at thy elbow. It makes us, or it mars us: think on that, And fix most firm thy refolucion, Rod. Be near at hand, I may miscarry in't. Jago. Here, at thy hand; 2 be bold and take chy sword. Rod. I have no great devotion to the deed, Yet he hath giv'n me satisfying reafonras; 'Tis . beolid, and take ty fltand.,
'Tis but a man gone. Forth my sword he dies. Jago. I've rub'd this young gnat almost to the sense, And he grows angry. Now whether he kill Cafji, Or CaJio him, or each do kill the other, Every way makes my gain. Live Rodorigo, Hecalls me to a refitution large Of gold and jewels, that I bob'd from him, As gifts to Defdemona. It muff not be. If CaJfio do remain, He hath a daily beauty in his life, That makes me ugly; and besides the Moor May unfold me to him; there stand I in peril; No, he muff die. Be it so, I hear him coming. [Exit Jago: Enter Caflio. Rod. I know his gate; 'tis he: villain thou dyes. [He runs at Cafio, and wounds him. Caf. That thrust had been mine enemy indeed, But that my coat is better than thou know'cft: I will make proof of thine. Rod. Oh, I am slain. [Fght, and both fall. Caf. I'm maim'd for ever; help hoa! murther, murther!. S CENE II. Enter Othello above at a Window. Oth. The voice of Cajito, sago keeps his word. Rod. Oh villain that I am! Oth. It is even so. Caf Oh help ho! light! a surgeon!--- Oth. 'Tis he! oh brave Jago, honest and just, That haft such noble sense of thy friend's wrong, T2hou teacheft me---Minion, your dear lies dead, And6
And your fate hyes apace. Strumpet, I come: From off nmy heart, thofl charms thi'e eyes, are blotted. Thy bed luft-flaik'd, ihall with lufs blood be (potted . [E. Oth. SC. NE I!!. Enter Lpdvi'q 4n^ Gtrcianq. Cafr What ho! no watch? no passage? mu thet, mur~ter! Gra. 'Tis rome mischance, the. voice is very direful. Caf. Oh help! Lod. Hark! Rod. Oh wretched villain! Loa. Towp or t4ree groan. It is: a. heavy night; There may be counterfeits: l.t's thiek'^ unfafc To come into the cry, without more help. Rod. No body come-: then flhal' I bleed to death.' Ekter Jag s his J k irt, Lod. Hark. Gra. Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons. ago. Who's there? whole noise is this that1 cries out murther ? Lod. Ws do, kno&ka ,ago. Do not you_ hear a cry? Cafr Here, here: for heav'n fake help me. Jago. What's the mater ? Gra. This is Othello's Ancient, as I take it. Lod. The fame indeed, a very valiant, fellow. Jago. What are you here, that cry so grievously? Caf. Jago? oh I'm fpoil'd, undone by villains! Give me some help. Jago. Oh me, lieutenant! what villains have done this-. Caf. I think that,one of them is hereabout, And cannot make away. S7ago.
Jago. Oh tre*acherous villains! What are you there? come in and give fore fhelp, Rod. Oh help me there. Cafl That's one of them. Jago. Oh murd'rous slave! oh villain! [Jag0 fitas i Rod. Oh damn'd Jago! oh inhuman ddg! sago. Kill men i'th' dark? where be these bloody thieres !i How silent is this town? ho, murther! mivthe!r What may you be! are you of good okr evil ? Lod. As you shall prove us, praise us. Jago. Signior Lodowico Lod. He, Sir. Jago. I cry you mercy ! here's Ca.Jfo hurt by vilteiQi Gra. Caffio? Jago. How is't, brotheri? Caf. My leg is cut in two. Jago. Marry heav'n forbid: Light gentlemen, UI'll bind it with my fhirtl SCEN E Iv. Enter Bianca. Bian. What is the matter hoa? who is't that cry'd? Jago. Who is't that cry'd? BkTan. Oh my dear Ca7i'o, My sweet Caffio, oh Ca6 o, Caffio, Ca/io. Jago. Oh notable f8rumpet. Caffi;o, may you fufpe& Who they (hould be, that have thus mangled1 you ? Caf. No. Gra. I am sorry to find you thus: I have been to seek you, Jago. Lend me a garter. So--- Oh for a chair, To bear him easily hence. ~ir7t ian,
shan. Alas he faints. Oh Caqffio, Cafflo, Gafloi! Jago. Gentlemen all, I do fufpe& this trash To be a party in this injury. Patience a while, good Ca/Jio, come, come: Lend me a light: know we this face, or no . Alas, my friend, and my dear country-man Rodorigo? no: Yes sure: yea, 'tis Rodorigo. Gra. What, of Venice? Jago. Even he, Sir: did you know him ? Gra. Know him? ah! Jago. Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon: These bloody accidents mul excuse my manners, That so negle&ed you. Gra. I am glad to fee you. Jago. How do you, Ca.Zo0? oh a chair, a chair. Gra. Rodorigo? rago. He, he, 'tis he: oh that's well said, the chair. Some good man bear him carefully from hence, I'll fetch the General's surgeon. For you, mistress, Save you your labour. He that lyes slain here, Caffio, Was my dear friend. What malice was between you ? Cars None in the world; nor do I know the man. Jago. What, look you pale? oh bear him out o'ch' air. Stay you good gentlemen. Look you pale, mistress ? Do you perceive the gastness of her eye? [To Bianca. Nay, if you stare, we (hall hear more anon. Behold her well, I pray you look upon her, Do you fee, gentlemen ? nay, guiltiness Will speak, though tongues were out of ,,^ SCENE
SCENE V: Enter iEmilia. AEmil. Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter, husband? Jago. CaJfio hath here been fee on in the dark By Rodorigo, and fellows that are 'fcap'd: He's almof slain, and Rodorigo dead. Emrnil. Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cajfio! Jago. This is the fruit of whoring. Pray Emilia, Go know of CaJio where he fupt to-night. What, do you (hake at that? Bian. He fupt at my house, but I therefore shake not. Jago. Oh did he so? I charge you go with me. lEmil. Oh fie upon thee, firumpet. Bian. I am no ftrumpec, but of life as honest As you that thus abuse me. Emil. As I? fie upon thee. Jago. Kind gentlemen, let's fee poor Caffio drefi. Come mistress, you must tell's another tale. iEmilia, run to the cittadel, And tell my lord and lady, what hath hap'd: \ill you go on afore? This is the night That either makes me, or fordoes me quite. [Exeunt. S CENE VI. A Bed-chamber: Defdemona is dzfcovered asleep in her bed. Enter Othello, with a light, and a sword. Oth. T T is the cause it is the cause, my foul, I Let me not name it to you, you chaste flars, VoLVI. Dddd
It is the cause. Yet I'll not fed her blood, Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than faow, And smooth as monumental alablafter: Yet she mufll die, else fheli betray more men. Put out the light, and then put .out the light; If I quench thee, thou flaming mitifter, I can again thy ormner light restore, Should I repent: but otwe pat out thy light, Thou cunning'ff pattern of excellig nature, I know not where is thar Promethean heat That can thy light re-lumizng. When I have pluck'd thy rose, I cannot give it vital growth again, , ^T It needs mufi wither --- I'll fmeli thee on the tree; [Kffng her. Oh balmy breath, that dplt almost lperfCvade Justice to break her sword. One more, one more ;c .j :j~ .: Be thus when thou art dead, aid I will kill thee, And love thee after --. One more, that's the last, So sweet, was ne'er so fatal! I must weep, .- But they are cruel rears: this forrow's heav'nly, ' It strikes, where it doth love --- She wakes -- , Def. Who's there, Othello ? Oth. Ay, Defdlemona. Def. Will you come to bed, my lord ? Oth. Have you pray'd to-night, Defdemona? Def Ay, my lord, Oth. If you bethink your self of any crime Unreconcil'd as yet to heav'n, and grace, Solicit for it straight. Def Alack, my lord, What may you mean by that? Oth. Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by. I would not kill thy unprepared fpirir, No,
No, heav'ns fore-fend, I would not kill thyfoa L b i. Def. Talk you of killing?. ' Oth. Ay, I do. Def Then heav'ti have niercy on me. Oth. Amen, with all my heart. Def. If you fay so, 1 hope you will not kill me. Oth. Hum. Def. And yet I fear you: for you're fatal then, '( When your eyes rowl so. . "' Why I should fear I know not, ? j Since guilt I know not: yet I feel I fear. Oth. Think on thy fins. Def. They're loves I bear to you. Oth. Ay, and for that thou dy'ft. Def. That death's unnatural, that kills for lovitg. Alas, why gnaw you so your lnether-lip? Some bloody paflion fhakesyour very frame; There are portents: but yet I hope, I hope, ' o They do not point on me. Oth. Peace, and be still. Def. I will so: what's the matter ? Oth. That handkerchief Which I so lov'd, and gave thee, thou gav'ft Caffio. Def. No by my life and foul: fend for the man, And ask him. Oth. Sweet foul, take heed, take heed of perjury, Thou art on thy death-bed. Def. Ay, but not yet to die. Oth. Presently. Therefore confcfs thee freely of thy fin: For to deny each article with oath, Cannot remove, nor choak the strong conception D d d * 'iT. 7' L.t, That
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die. Def. Oh heav' n have mercy on me. Oth. I fay, amen. Def. And have you mercy too. I never did Offend you in my life; never lov'd Cafio, But with such general warantry of heav'n, As I might love. I never gave him token. Oth. By heav'n I saw my handkerchief in's hand. Oh perjur'd woman! thou doflt stone my heart, And mak'fl me call, what I intend to do, A murther, which I thought a sacrifice. I saw the handkerchief. Def. Hie found it then; I never gave it him; fend for him hither, Let him confess a truth. Oth. He hath confef}. Def: What, my lord? Oth. That he hath--- us'd thee--. Def How? unlawfully? Oth. Ay. Def. He will not fay so. Oth. No, his mouth is fitopp'd; Honeflt Jago hath ta'en order for't. Def. Oh, my fear interprets. What, is he dead ? Oth. Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge Had fitomach for them all. Def. Alas, he is betray'd, and I undone. Oth. Out strumpet! weep'ft thou for him to my face? Def. Oh banish me, my lord, but kill me not. Oth. Down, firumpet. Def. Kill me to-morrow, let me live to-night. Oth. Nay, ifyou Irive. Def.
Def. But half an hour* .--but while I fay one prayer. Oth. It is too late. , fAtempts to. smother her. SC E N E VII. .Emilia at the door. lEmil. My lord, my lord! what hoa! my lord, my lordr , Oth. What noise is this? not dead? not, yet quie ,dad) , I that am cruel, am yet merciful, , , , I would not have thee linger in thy pain., , , So, so. .Emil. within.] What hoa! my lord, my lord! Oth. "Who's th.re? j/>il. Oh, L.;, good lord, I would speak a word with you. Oth. Yes , Erni/ia ---- by and by ----fhe's dead. Tis like hi'," coinis to speak of. Caffio's death; The ni:{': was high. Ha, no more moving?. Stiil as rithe grave. Shall flhe come in ? were't good? ? ; , .. ** ' . " : ,: I think flhe stirs again ----No ---what's the belt? If (he come in (he'll sure speak to my wife; My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife. Oh insupportable! oh heavy hour! Methinks it (hould be now a huge eclipse Of fun and moon, and that th' afrighted globe Should yawn at alteration--. AJmil. I beseech you That I may speak with you. Oh, good my lord! ---- Oth. I had forgot thee; oh come in, milia. Soft, by and by, let me the curtains draw. Where art thou? what's the matter with thee now? Enter tEmilia. Almil. Oh, my good lord, yonder's foul murthers done. * Def. But half an hour---- Oth. Being done, there is no pause. Def. But while I fay one prayer. 4 Oth.
Oth. What? now? .*Emil. But now, my lord. Oth. It is the very error of the moon, She comes more near the earth than (he was wont, And makes men mad. ,4im.d Ca/j/io, my lord, hath kill'd A young J/enetian, call'd Rodorigo. Oth. Rodorigo kill'd? and Ca0io kill'd. Amil. No, Caflo is not kill'd? Oth. Not Ca/io kill'd? then murther's out of tune, And sweet revenge grows harsh. Def. Oh falsely, falsely murder'd. ./Emil. Alas! what cry is that? Oth. That? what? .EmmiL Out and alas, that was my lady's voice. .... Help! help hoa! help ! oh lady speak again, Sweet Defdemona, oh sweet mistress, speak. Def. A guiltless death I die. Eamil. Oh who hath done this deed ? Def. No body, I my fell, farewel Commend me to my kind lord; oh farewel. [Dies. Oth. Why, how flhould she be murder'd A1~miL Alas! who knows? Oth. You heard her fay her seif, it was not I. lEmil. She laid so, I must needs report the truth. Oth. She's like a liar gone to burning hell, 'Twas I that kill'd her. lEmil. Oh the more angel she, and you the blacker devil. Oth. She turn'd to folly, and (he was a whore. .Emil. Thou dost bely her, and thou art a devil. Oth. She was false as water. A/2mil. Thou art rash as fire, to fay That she was false. Oh she was heav'nly true. Oth.
Oth. Cafflo did top her; ask thy husband else. Oh, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell, But that I did proceed up6nj'uft grounds To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all. lEmil. My husband! Oth. Thy husband. Amil. That the was false to wedlock? Oth. Ay, with Caflo :'had the been true, If heav'n would make me (uch another world, Of one entire and perfe&t chrysolite, I'd not have fold her for it. A/Lmil. My husband? Oth. Ay, 'twas he that told me-firfi; An honefr man he is, and hates the slime That flicks on filthy deeds. AEmil. My husband? - - Othb. What needs this'b iteration woman? I fay thy husband. ^ AJm.1. Oh mistress! villany has made mocks with love. My husband fay the was false ? Oth. He, woman; I fay thy husband; do'f1 underfland the word? My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Jago. Azmi. If he fay so, may his pernicious foul Rot half a grain&a-day; he lies to th' heart. She was too fond of her most filthy bargain. Oth. Hah? /Emil. Do thy worst: This deed of thine is no more worthy heav'n, Than thou waft worthy her. Oth. Peace, you were best. Amil. Thou haft not half that power to do me harm As I have to be hurt: oh gull! oh dok! b~~~ itrne ~ 4 7is /rpccch andE thc so7:.. b iterance,
As ignorant as dirt; thou'ft done a deed --. I care not for thy sword, I'll make thee known, Though I loft twenty lives-- Help! help hoa! help! The Moor hath kill'd my mistress. Murther, murther! S CEN E VIII. Enter Montano, Gratiano, Jago, and others. Mon. What is the matter? how now, General? Amil. Oh, are you come, Jago? you have done well, That men must lay their murthers on your neck. Gra. What is the matter? .eLmil. Disprove this villain, if thou be'ft a man; He says thou toldft him that his wife was sa!fe: I know thou didft not, thou'rt not such a villain. Speak, for my heart is full. Jago. I told him what I thought; and told no more Than what he found himfelfwas apt and true. jEmil. But did you ever tell him, (he was false? Jago. i did. AImiL You told a lie; an odious damned lie: Upon my foul a lie; a wicked lie. She false with Cafio ? did you fay with Calio ? Jago. With CaJfio, mistress; go to, charm your tongue. .Emil. I will not charm my tongue; I'm bound to speak, My mistress lies here murther'd in her bed. * ---- murder'd in her bed. All. Oh heav'ns forefend! JEmil. And your reporcs have set the murther on. Otb. Nay, itare not, masters, it is true indeed. Gra. 'Tis a strange truth. Mon. Oh monfbrous act! AEmil. Villany ! villany ! villany ! 'I think upon't ---- I think --- I fmell't --- Oh villiiany I thought so then; I'll kill my seif for grief, Oh villany, villany ! _Jago. What, are you mad ? c.
Jago. What, are you mad e I charge you get you home. .Emnil. Good gentle men, let me have leave to speak 'Tis proper I obey him, but not now: Perchance, Jago, I will ne'er go home. Oth. Oh! oh! oh! [Othello falls on t AEmil. Nay, lay thee down and roar: For thou haft kill'd the sweetest innocent, That e'er did lift up eye. Oth. Oh the was foul! I scarce did know you, uncle; there lyes your neice, Whose breath indeed there hands have newly Rftop'd; I know this a& shews horrible and grim. Gra. Poor DI)efdemona ! I'm glad thy father's dead: Thy match was mortal to him; and pure grief Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now, This fight would make him do a defp'rate turn; Yea, curse his better angel from his fide, And fall to reprobation, Oth. 'Tis pitiful; but yet Jago knows, That the with Cauio hath the a&t of thame A thousand times committed. Cafflo confef it, And the did gratifie his amorous works, With that recognizance and pledge of love Which I first gave; I saw it in his hand; It was an handkerchief, an antique token My father gave my mother. /Emil. Oh heav'n! oh heav'nlyh-powers! Jago. Come, hold your peace. .mil. 'Twill out, 'twill our ---I peace No, I will speak as liberal as the C air, Let heav'n, and men, and devils, let them all, All, all, cry shame againt me, yet I'll speak. VOL. VI. Eee c north. ie bed. ago.
Jago. be wvil an gef y hioie. .mi. I wil not. t.g I ti f.b hiw f. Gra. Fie, your sword upon a oimanl ? Amd. Oh) thou dull Mob&r. bcha h dkt'dtchier'hbu jeaak'toif I found by fortune, and ilid give my husband; For often, with a solemn earnetaefse, (More than indeed beiong'd to lich "trinie,) He begg'd of me to ifteal it. sago. Villanous whore! Emil. She give it Caffio 2 alas I fotiai it, And I did give't my hus'band. Jago. Filth, thou 4ielt. Emil. By heav'n I do not, tI Ao nOt, tlftertin: Oh murd'rous coxcornat whatrhidt/lc id-h ia odl Do with so good a wife ? [Jago breaks throvgu and wdouind is 'hs fe, tIeH :tfs out. Oth. Are there no flohes inheav'n, But what serve for the thunder? precious villaitn. Gra. The woman falls.; sure hehaith kidfl'd this wife. Emil. Ay, ay~; oh lay me by my mrirhfS' fide. Gra. He's gone, but his wife's kiIl'd. Mon. 'Tis a notorious villain,; rake this Weapon, Which I recover'd have here firom the hMOor: Come, guard the door without, let hiim nt 'plafs, But kill him rather; I'll after that fame villain, For 'tis a damned slave. [Exeunt Mdntano -and ati1anQ. S CE N tE IX. Oth. I am not valiant neither; But every puny WVhijPftr )gets my sword. But why should hdfibor dit-live honesty. Let it go all. AEmil.
imd. What did thy Cong boi, hdy : Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan, And die in mufick; tWdovj IIlow WVillow-- - Moor, she was chaft, flhe lov'd thee^ cruel Moor, So come my foal to bliss, as I speak true; So 4peaking aJ I think, alas, I dit, [.f.mitii dhis, Oth. I have another weapon in this chamber, It was a sword of Spain, the Ebro's tempet; Oh here it is: uncle, I must come forth. Gra. within.] if thou attempt it, it will coit thee dear; Thou haft no weapon, and perforce must ruffer. Oth. Loof ii un ft d tefi, &md speak with me, Or naked as I am, I wfill affult thee. Gra. What is the mnattet ? Oth. LoT I have a Teapon: A better never did it seif fait(ai Utpon a foldier's thigh. I've seen the day, That with this little arm, aad this g6ood sword, I made my way through more ittipedti~eneats, Than twenty mties yotr stop. Batr, oh vtain boast! Who can controut his fate ? 'tis not so now. Be not afraid, though you do fee mfe weapoa'd; Here is my journey's end, hiere is my butt, And very sea-mark of my utmost fail. Do you go back difmay'd : 'tis a loft fear: Man but a rush against Othello's breast, And he retires. Where flaould Othello go? Now--. how dofttihou look now? oh ill-ftarr'd wench Pale as thy smock! When we shall mneet at comnpt, This look of thine will hurl my foul from heav'n, And fiends will fnatoh at it. Gold, cold, my girl? j In the firfl edition it is Ifcebrfees ttefpter. J'thece c6fraped to Ice-b'rooks. Ebro's temper : the watbrs of that river of Sprain are particularly famous for tem- pering of steel. The finefl arms in the world, the Caitalonian Susies. E e ee z Ev'n
Ev'n like thy chastity. Oh cursed slave! Whip me, ye devils, From the poflfeflion of this heav'nly fight; Blow me about in winds, roat me: in sulphur, Wa(h me in fteep-down gulfs of liquid fire--- Oh Defdemona/ Defdemona! dead;, dead! oh, oh! SCENE X. Enter Lodovico, Caflio led'in wounded, Montano, and Jago prufoner, zwith o#cers. Lod. Where is this rash and most unfortunate man ? Oth. That's he that was Othello: here I am. Lod. Where is that viper? bring the villain forth. Oth. I look down tow'rds his feet; but that's a fable. If that thou beeft a devil, I cannot kill thee. [Othello wounds Jago. Lod. Wrench bis fword'from him. Jago. I bleed, Sir, but not kill'd. Oth. I am not sorry neither: I'd have thee live;. For in my sense, 'tis happiness to die. Lod. Oh thou, Othello, that waft once so good, Faln in the pratice of a cursed slave, What (hall be laid to thee ? 0th. Why any thing; An honourable murth'rer, if you will : For nought I did in hate, butall in honour. Lod. This wretch hath part confea his villany: Did you and he consent in Cafo's death ? Oth. Ay. Caf. Dear General, I never gave you cause. Oth. I do believe it, and I ask your pardon: Will you, I pray, demand that demy-devil, Why
Why he hath thus enfnar'd my foul and body ? jago. Demand me nothing; what you know, From this time forth I never will speak word. Locd. What ? not to pray? Gra. Torments will ope your lips. Oth. Well, thou dof bet. Locd. Sir you ihall underitand what hath befalh, Which as I think, you know not5 here's a letter, Found in the pocket of the lain Rodrigo, And here another, one of chemimports The death of Caffio to be undertook By Rodorigo. Oth. Oh villain! Caf Mol heathenish and most gros i! Lod. Now, here's another discontented paper Found in his pocket too; and this it seems Rodrigo meant t'have sent this damned villain; But that belike Jago in the interim Came in, and fatisfy'd him. Oth. Oh thou pernicious caitiff! How came you, Ca//0, by that handkerchief That was my wife's? Caf. I found it in my chamber; And he hisnfelf confeft it but even now, Than there he dropt it for a special purpose, Which wrought to his desire. Oth. Oh fool, fool, fool! Caf. There is besides, in Rodorigo~s letter, How he upbraids Jago that he made him Brave me upon the watch; whereon it came That I was catl; and even now he spake After long seeming dead, Jago hurt him, Jago let him on. you know; Lod.
Lod. You must ofifake ttiis tit*irf, ahd g8 *i2ft Us; Your6*~r a4'd yor -rfiIiatid i trAif 6fs, And CaJio rules in Cqy . FPdi- thit laiei If there be any cunning cruelty, That can torment him much arnd h6ld hitm loitgj, It shall be his. You (hall close prifonri ffi, Till that the natfre rfy - tfat be 'ki6Wi To the Yeneian ftt te. Ctmen , Bthg a i)a y Oth. Soft you; a word fir ti btfore yku go. I've done the slate fbme fevi'c, anil ieh, kl'tniW'r No more of that. I pray yiat in yo* ?tters, When you (hall these unlucky deeds relate, Speak of me, as I am. Nothing extenuate, Nor fee down ought in mik&. TIi2 zii u ft yda f'pea Of one that lov'd nidt feik, . ti o iatl , Of one, not easily jealidi; Btt critr ~rf6dht, Perplex'd in the ext~ea18 ; 6f 6ne tv!ihFe ahid, Like the base t Indian, threw a feyr away Richer than all his tribe; of one, wh0ife eyes Albeit unused to the melting mdda, Drop tears as fast as "ti& idlb'iah tfres Their medicinal gum. Set you down tbhis. And-lay besides, that in Aleppo Oisxe, Where a malignant and 't'irbafid 'it*r Beat a Venetian, and tiradiucI'hd'te :ftae e, I took by th' throat the circumcised dog, And fmiote him, thus. [Simbs hi~felf. Lod. Oh bloody period! Gra. All that is fpokie is mirrfd. -f- In the firfi edition it is Jodian, occafion'd probably by the word Tribe jus after, but the common reading is better; as- the 'word Tribe is applid~aie to uny race of people, and the thought of ah inorent ridian's caSing away a pearl 'very natural in itself 'whereas to make sense of the other, one mu#t presuppose fmfze particular flory of a Jew alluded to, 'which is much less obvious. Oth.
Oth. I kist thee, ere I kill'd thee. No way but this, Killing my self, to die upon a kiss. [Dies. Caf. This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon, For he was great of heart. Lod. Oh Spartan dog! More fell than anguish, hunger, or the Tea! Look on the tragick loading of this bed; This is thy work; the obje poibfons fight, --- Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the houfTe, And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor, For they fuicceed to you. To you, lord governor, Remains the censure of this hellifl villain : The time, the place, the torture, oh inforce it. MPy self will fitraight aboard, and to the itate, This heavy a&, with heavy heart, relate. [Exeunt. The End of S H 'A K Es P E A R's Plays. INDEX
I N D X OF THE CHARACTERS, SENTIMENTS, SPEECHES and DESCRIPTIONS IN S HAK S TEA jR. VOL. VI. -- Il~-~L~- g g~III~IC-~C -a ---a----a---- --n~--p-~a~ -~-P I~ -- ~~ - --- -- -- - I- 1------- -~101 1. -I a FE fff
SEC T. C H A R A C T E OF HISTORICAL PERS ON S. A. A R THUR, a hopeful young Prince, unfortunate. Vol. 3. Alcibiades, banifh'd for interceding for his Friend. Vol. y. - - - - - - visits Timon with two Misses. ibid. - - - - - - -- - exhorted to Cruelty by him, and the Women to Lust ibid. - - - - - - conquers Athens. - - - - - - ibid. y, Mark, his Conference with Brutus after Cafar was mur- ther'd. - - - - - - - Vol. f. - his Refletions on it, when alone. - speaks Cafar's Funeral Oration. - - - - - his Eloquence prais'd by Caftius. - his Valour degenerates into Fondness for Cleopatra. Vol. y. - resolves to leave her. - - - - - - - - - his former Bravery defcrib'd by Ot3avius Cafar. - Pompey's wilh that he may live on in love and luxury. - - - quarrels with Olavius, which ends in a Marriage with Offavia. - his Genius inferior to O6a'vius's. - complains of Oavius's ill-treatment to Otlavia. - - - - beaten at A6Rium, and despairs after it. - sends to Odavius to treat, and is refus'd. - - - - - - - grows jealous of Cleopatra. - beats Caesar by Land, and meets the Queen in Rapture. ? - his Fleet revolting he quarrels again with Cleopatra. - - - being told she is dead he falls on his Sword. - - - - - carried to Cleopatra he dies in her Arms. - OiFavius and his Generals lament and praise him. - - - - and Ckopatra. his Charader, - - - - - - - Vol. 6. Play. K. Johb. Timon. ibid. ibid. ibid. Jul. Cafar., Ant. and Cleop. ro. a-d Cr- A. IScene. IPerfon. 3 4 4 Sy 3 S. I 3 4 iO 6 4 4 3 4 6 2 I 4 1 4 4 6. 7 6 9 Io 12 3 AJoni Ajax Sooth. Avt.
Lanch, her Beauty and Virtue. - - -- - Vol. 3. SBurzundy, Duke of, a False Ally. Vol. 4. Beadfort, Cardinal. vid. inchefter. - - - - - - Buckingham, Duke of, treacherous, cruel, mercenary. Vol. 4. - -- - - - - in Henry 8th's Reign, raih, choleric. - - - - ibid. ---- his Chara&er given by Hen. 8. ibid. -------Condemn'd. - -- - -- -- ibid. Bul/len, Anne, her Beauty. ibid. - - - - -- item. ... ibid. - -- --- item. ibid.. - - - - - --- item.- ----- -- ibid. Brutus, referv'd and melancholic Vol. ". - - - spirited up by Calffius againfl Cfear. - - - - - - - - - of great Authority with the People - - - - his afelf-debate upon Cafar's Death. - - - - - - - opens himself freely to the Conipirators. - - - - declares for saving Anthony. . .----- - - - - importun'd by his Wife Portia. - - - his Speech to the People, to jufltify Cafar's Murther. - -- - quarrels with Caffis. - - - - - - - - - - relates the Death of Portia. - - - - fees Ce/far's Ghost. - - - - - - - - -- - takes his lafit farewel of Cassius. - - - - resolves to die, and kills himself. - - - - - - - prais'd by Antony. Banquo, his Chara&er (for the reft, vid. Mackbeth.) - - - Vol. y. C. C , nflance, a Mother passionately fond. Vol. 3. - Cade, John, a bold crafty Rebel - - - - Vol. 4. Clifford, bold and revengeful, ibid. Caesar, Julius. - - - - - - - - - ibid. Catharine, Q. to Henry 8. ibid. S- - - -- pitied by Anne Butlen. - - - - - ibid. S-- -- her Speech to the King before her Divorce. ibid. S- - - prais'd by the King - - - - -. - ibid. - - - - - - recommends her Daughter and Servants to him. ibid. Cromwell, Thomas. - - - - - r - - ibid. Cranmer's, Characer by Gardiner. ibid. - - - --- by Cromrwel. - - - - - - ibid. S- -- by the King. ibid. - - - -- his Speech over Princess Elizabeth. ----- ibid. Coriolanus, brave, proud, a Contemner of the Populace. - - Vol. 5". - - - - - - chides his Soldiers when repuls'd. ibid. - - - - - - his Character. - - - - - - - --- --- his Entry into Rome after a Vidory. -- ---- his Actions fumm'd up by Cominius. - - - -- - - - aprov'd by the Tribunes, he rails at the Populace. - - - - - - banifh'd. - ...----- -- - - - - - - applies to, and is kindly receiv'd by Aufidiurs. - -- -- - not to be diverted by his Friends from invading Rome. - - - - yields to his Mother's intreaties. ------ - - - - - - slain by the envy and treachery of Auzfidius Ciefar, Julius, ufpicious of Cassius. - - - - - Vol. y. .- - - refutcth the Crown that was oflir'd. S- - - addicted. to fhperftition, and lov'd flattery. - - - - dissuaded by Calphurnia from going to the Senate. S- - - his contempt of Death. - - - - - -- - firm Play. K. John. I Hen. 6. Richard 3. Hen. 8. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. Jul. Cafar. Mackbeth. K. John. z Hen. 6. 3 Hen. 6. Richard 3. Hen. 8. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. Hen. 8. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. Coriolanus. ibid. Jul. Cafar. A&. IScene. S. 8 2 S. I. 2. 7 5 2. I 3 3 7 I 2. 3 5 2.3 4 7 9 2. 5' I 3 5- 6 7 2 I I 5- 6 8 8 4 6 i 6 4 I 3 6 4 5" 2. 4 Perflb. Cit. King. Chain. Sus . 2 Gent. Cafe. Mac. Tork. Prince. Norf. 3 Gent. Lar. Bru. Mef. Corn. Caf. Caf. Cafe. Dee. Ce.
Cafar, Julius, fi'm against those who wrong him. - - - - Alfainated. - - - - - - - - - - - his Ghost appears to Brutus. Cajfisls, confers with Brutus against Cafar. - - - - - his CharaQer. - - - - - - - - - resolves to kill himself if Ca'far is made King. - - - - his Quarrel with Brutus. - - - - - - - ill Omens flagger him tho' an Epicurean. - - - - presages he should die on his Birth-day. - - - - - - kills himself. - ibid. - - - - mourn'd and prais'd by Titinius, Mejf'ala and Brutus. Cafca's Chara&er. - - - - - - - - - Cleopatra, the power of her Beauty over Antony. - - - --- tenderly passionate. - - - - - - - - ---- her Chara&er of Antony when he had left her. - - - - - - her failing down the Cydnus defcrib'd. - - - - [for the reft vid. Antony. ------ her Lamentation.over the dead Body of Antony. - - - - -- resolves to die. - - - - - - visited by Odavis. - - - - - - - - - - - - affronted by her Treasurer Seleucus. - - -- -- kills her self with an Afpick. - - - - - - - D. D Owlafs - - - - - - - - V Duncan, K. of Scotland murther'd. vid. Macbeth. ibid. ibid. - - ibid. Vol. 4. - - - ibid. Queen. Vol. I. - Vol. 5-. ibid. Jul. ibid. - ibid. Ant. - Play. Cafar. cleo.i 'ol. 3. Hen. 4. E. EDzDward the Black Prince. - - - - - - Vol. 3. SEle.nor XVife of D. Humphrey, Ambitious and given to super- flition - - - - - , - - Vol. 4. - - - - - . i, Procefflon for Penance, and is banifh'd. ibid. Edward 4t' .'(c.cu., brave, fuccefsful. - - - - - - - ibid. - - - - his two Sons. - - - - murther'd. - - - - - Edward P. of Wales, Son to Henry 6. Q. Elizaecth, prophetically defcrib'd by Cranmer. - - - - - - - - Complimented by the Title of the Vestal Enobarbus, a brave Rcman Captain. - - - - - - - - dies with grief for deserting Antony. F. FAulconbridge, boastful, brave and enterprizing. - - i Fulvia's Death and Charater. G. GLendower - - - - - - - - - - - - defcrib'd by Hotspur. Glocefler, Humphrey D. of gives up his white Staff. - - - - - - fees his Dutchefs's Procession for Penance. - - - - - Accus'd to the King by the Queen and others. - - - - - - Arrefled for High Treason, he defends himself. - - - - - murther'd by flrangling. - - - - Gardiner, Bp. of WVinchefer, flattering and cruel. H. _.JEnry yth, whilst Prince. . - - - - - - item. Vol. VI. G g g g Richard 2. 2 Hen 6. 2 Hen. 6. 3 Hen. 6. ibid. Richard 3. Richard 3. Henry 8. Midf N. Dr. Ant. and Cleop. ibid. Vol. 3. K. John. Vol. '. Ant. and Vol. 3. ibid. - Vol. 4. ibid. - ibid. ibid. - ibid. ibid. Vol. 3. Vol. 3. Cleop. r Hen. 4. ibid. 2 iHen. 6. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. Hen. 8. Richard 2. I Hen. 4. Aa. Scene. Pcrfon. 3 i Caf: 4 7 2.3 3 4 r. 6 5 3 3 6 12 2 3 6 3 4 7 I 2 7 I 2 6 6 6 4 Caf Ant. Eno. t Hot. rork. Ob. Ant. Isar. King. Boling. K. Hen. Hotfpr
Hotspur. (vid. Percy) H. yth in Armou. - ..Vol. 3. Henry 4th defcrib d by Hotspur. Vol. 3. - - - his Son Prince Henry. -.. --- - Vol. 3. - - - item Vol. 3. Henry yth. - - - - - Vol. 3.. - - - item. Vol. 4 Henry 6th, meek, religious, unfortunate.- - - - - Vol. 4. Henry 8th, vid. Q. Catharine, Anne Bullen. I. f 0HN, King, diflembling, cruel, irresolute, unfortunate. Vol. 3. SJoan, the Maid of Orleans. - .- Vol. 4. - - - - - raifeth Fiends., ibid. -- -- - taken Prisoner. - - - - -- - ibid. - -- - Condemn'd to be burn'd. ibid. James I. King, prophetically defcrib'd by Cranmer. - - - ibid. Julio Romano, his Chara&er. Vol. 2. L E A R, King, choleric, fickle, mad, miserable. Lepidus's Characer by Antony. - - - - - - - by Pompey. M. Vol. 3. Vol. 5. 'JMOrtimrer - .. . . - - - - - - Vol. 3 a Margaret, Henry 6th's Queen, enrag'd with her own miseries, exults at others. Vol. 4. Moor, Sir 7homas. - ..-- ----- ibid. Menenius Agrippa, his Fable of the Belly and Limbs. Vol. y. - - - - - his Chara&er by himself. -- ----- ibid. his Characer of Coriolanus. ibid. Macbeth, his bravery in Battel. - - - - - Vol. y. ----- hath his Greatness foretold by Witches - , - - - the conflic of his Mind when he first intended to kill the King. - - - - - - - - - S- - - - his Temper defcrib'd by his Lady. -- - -f- he resolves on miurthering the King, and encourages Macbeth. - - - - - - -.. . he staggers in his Resolution, and is confirm'd again by his VWife. - - - - - - - - - - -- his Soliloquy before he kills ihe King, and horror after. ----- meditates Banquo's Death, and employs murtherers. - - - - - Banquto's Ghost appears to him. - - - - - - - - - - consults thle Witches again. - - - - his Chara&er by Malcolm. - - - - - - - - - - diftrated with horror. ---- - despairs, on hearingthe Englijh advance againfi him. -- -- - told of his Lady's Death. - - - - - - - - - - - slain by Macduff. N. J'\Orthumberlanr d'S .grief for Hotspur. .Rpheus's Muflck. - - - - - v/ ----item. Oiawtus Cafar, his interview with Brutus and Caflius. Lfor the refit vid. Antony and Cleopatra. Vol. 3. Vol. 4. Vol. i. Vol. y.. Play. I Hen. 4. I Hen. 4. ibid. z Hen. 4. Henry Y. I Hen. 6. 1,2,3. Hen. 6. K. Jobhn. \ Hen. 6. ibid. ibid. ibid. Hen. 8. J7nt. T'ale. K. Lear. Jul. Cafar. Ant. and Cleop. x Hent. 4. Richard 3. Hen. 8. Coriol. ibid. ibid. Macbeth. z Hen.4. Hen. 8. 2 Gent. Ver. Jul, Cefar. Aa. 4 4 5 4 I I I i i Y S" Y Y 4 2 I 3 I 2 3 4 2 3 4 Scene. l i I 5, &c. 3 3 6 8 Sr x. I 4 6 2. I 4 I 4 7 9.10 2.3 2 2 4 2. 3 7.8 3 I 5" 2. Person. (er. rer. K. Hen. Cant. 3 Gent. Men. North. Song. Pro. Percy,
pDErcy, Harry Hotspur. Vol. 3. - -- item. - - - - - - - - - Vol. 3. -- - - - item. Vol. 3. - - - -- his Death. - - - - - - - Vol. 3. - -- Charaaer, by Lady Percy. Vol. 3. Portia, a Roman Lady of an heroic Spirit. wid. Brutus. - - - - R. RIchard the Second, his ill Condu&. - - - - Vol. 3. S- - -- - -- item. Vol. 3. - - - - - - - - - - - item. - - - - - - Vol. 3. - - - - - - item. Vol. 3. Richard I. his Chara&er. - - - - - - Vol. 3. Richard 3. ambitious, brave, dissembling, cruel, unfortunate, Vol. 4. his Birth prodigious. Vol. 4. - - - - - - his Person and Manners defcrib'd by Q. Margaret. Vol.4. - - _ - - defcrib'd by his Mother, the D. of Tork. - - - ihid. S. SAlisbury's Death and Character. Suffolk, proud, false, enterprizing. - - - - -- his Death. - - - T. Albot, when Prisoner in France. - - - - slain with his Son. 7'isrel, James. - - - fimon of Athens, beggar'd by Flatterers. - - - - - idem. - - - - - - - - ibid. his last entertainment for the Parasites. ibid. retires, and lhakes off humanity. - - digging for Roots finds Gold. vilited by Alcibiadesr, excites him to cruelty. - - - - pinch'd with Hunger, his refle&ions on the Earth. compares himself with Apemantus - - - - - - he gives Gold and encouragement to the Thieves. visited by his honest Steward: - - - - - by the Poet and Painter. by the Senators, entreating him to command againhft Alcibiades. his Death and Epitaph. - - - - - - - V. /Olumnia, a Mother of an heroic Spirit. - . - - inflruas Coriolanus to address the People. - - - - - - - diverts him from deflroying Rome. - - Valeria's Chaflity prais'd by her Husband. W. lncheffer, Cardinal Beaufort's Chara&er. v - ---- his Death. - - - - - - - H'arwick, brave but inconstant WJolfey, Cardinal, his Chara&er by Norfolk, &c. - - - - his Power over the King. - - - Play. I Hen. 4. i Hen. 4. I Hen. 4. 2 Hen. 4. 2 Heen. 4. Richard 2. ibid. ibid. I Hen. 4. K. John. S3 Het. 6. I& Rich. 3. 3 Hen. 6. Richard 3. ibid. I Hen. 6. 2 HIen. 4. ibid. I Hen. 6. ibid. Richard a Scene. I 4 Vol. 4. - ibid. - - ibid. - Vol. 4. ibid. - - ibid. A&. I 3 I 2 2 2 2. 3 I I 4 I 4 I 4 4 1 2 3 4 I 3 3 3 I 2 Vol. y. Timon. Person. K. He,. K. Hen. P. Hen. Maort. Gaunt. Gaunt. K. Hen. Bast. K. Hen. Dutch. Tal. Tal. Page. Spem. Sen. Glou. Norf. HWolfcy, ibid. ibid. Coriol. ibid. Coriol. I Hen. 6. : Hen. 6. 2. 3 Hen. 6. Hen. 8. ibid. Vol. y. ibid. Vol. 5. Vol. 4. - ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. 6
yolfey upbraided by Q. Catharine. - - - - - - - his rete&ion on his fall. - - -o his Deatlh related and mix'd Charadeir. - - Y. 7Ork, Archbishop of - - - - - Tork, D. of, enterprizing, valiant, unfortunate: S Vol. 4. ibid. - - ibid. - Vol. 3. VoL 4. SECT. II. INDEX of Manners, Paflions, and their external EffeAs. N. B. 7ihe Names of the fictitious Persons to whom these Cha- ratfers are apply'd, are annex'd in an alphabetical Index ensuing. Vid. SeEi. 3. A. A L L Y, a perfidious one, in Burgundy. Ambition. -- - - - cover'd with specious Humility. - - - -.... - jealous of a fuccefsful Friend. 'Ambitious Woman in Eleanor. 4nger, in the D. of Buckingham. - - - - - - its external Ette&s painted. Affiiion. Admiration. .. . Atheistical harden'd Villain. vid. Barnardine. Avarice and Cruelty. vid. Shylock. Vol. z. Mer. of Fen. B Iflop, true to his Sovereign, Carlisle. - - - a Rebel, York. Boasters, the Dauphin, &c. - - - - - -- the Bastard. - - - - - defcrib'd . - - - - Vol. 4. ibid. - Vol. s; Vol. 4. - ibid. ibid. Vol. I. - - ibid. - - - - Vol.3. ibid. .- - ibid. ibid. S- - ibid. (Ourtier (a bold plain-dealing) Gaunt. - - - Vol. 3. - ----------- Kent. ibid. - - - - - an accomplifh'd one, vid. Buckingham. Hen. 8. Vol. 4. Courcfhip, Glocefter's to Lady Anne. - - - ibid. - - - - - -honourable injoin'd by a Father. Vol. I. --.-- defcrib'd. - - - - - - . ibid. - - - - -- a beautiful Scene betwixt Romeo and Juliet. Vol. 6. Councellor, an honest one, vid. Gonzalo. - - - - Child, the Duty it owes a Father. Vol. i. Country Squire, in Slender. - - - ----- ibid. (haftity Icandaliz'd, beautifully painted in Hero. ibid. Cihaftity. vid. Valeria. - - - - - . . Hen. ibid. ibid. z He, z. 3 Play. 8. . 4. Her. 6. I Hen. 6. Hen. 8. jut. Casfar. Ant. and Cleop. 2. Hen. 6. Hen. 8. ibid. TIemp. ibid. Richard 2. z Hen 4. Hen. $. K. John. ibid. Richard 2. K. Lear. Richard 3. Temp. Mlidf. N. Dr. Rom. and Jul. Midf. NV. Dr. MW. of lVindf. aM. A. abt. Noth. At. 2 3 4 I 3 3 2, 3 I I 3 5. 3 :2. I 4 1 2 I 4 Scene. 6 6 32 3 10.1 2. Z I. 2 I 3 I I. 2. Person. Gris. Katik. Wo~l. Brut. Vex. WVol. Ari. Pro. Glo. Prof. Ege. The. Courage
Courage in old Men. - . . - - - Vol. I. Courage. ibid. - - - - - different Notions of it in a Senator, and a General. Vol. y. Care, in a Merchant. - - - - Vol. z. Constancy. . . . - - - - - - Vol. .- D Aughters, undutiful, in Goneril and Regan. - - - - - dutiful, in Cordelia. - - - Despair, in the Agonies of Death. Cardinal Beauford. - - - - of Pardon. - - - - - - Vol3. 3 - - - ibid. Vol. 4. - - Vol. 2. Play. M. A. abt. Noth. Ta7m. of the &c. T'tmon. Mer. of Ven. Ant. and. Cleop. iK. Lear. ibid. z Hen. 6. Wint. Tale. Vol. 4. Hen. 8. FEar, arifng from an expe&ed Evil. - - - - Father, an unnatural, in Tork. Father's pafimon on the ill Condua of a Daughter. - - - - - - - fondness for his Child. French Quack's Airs, in Dr. Cains. Fury. - - - - - Vol. 3. Vol. 3. Vol. x. Vol. - - Vol. - - Vol. G Ravity affe&ed, to be thought Wife. - - - - Vol. 2. Grief. Vol. 3. Grief, its Nature to multiply afflitions. - - - Vol. 3. - - - beautifully defcrib'd in Cordelia. - - - - ibid. - - - at parting of Lovers, Q. Marg. and Suffolk. Vol. 4. - - - a Mother's for her Son murther'd. - - - ibid. - - - wrought to Rage in Q. JlBrgaret. ibid. - - - a Father's (an Old General) for his Sons and Daughter. V. 5". - - - a virtuous Wife's, wrong'd by her Husband - - Vol. 6. - - - a Husband's on the murther of his Wife and Children. Vol. 5. - - - a Valiant Father's for the Death of a brave Son. - - ibid. H Ope. - - - - - Hope. Hoflefs, uicklv. - - - - Highway-man, GadfJill. Horror, its outward effeQ&s. - - - - rais'd in the Characers of Aaron, I. J Ufltices, Country, Shallow and Silence. Inconflancy. J-ealousy, in lord. - - - - Jealouly, the rife and growth of it charadt tealoufy. - - - - - - . - VVol. 3. Vol.4. - - - Vol. 3. ibid. o- - - Vol. 4. 'Tamora, and Saturnius. V. y. - - - - Vol 3. Vol. i. :cr'd in Leontes. S - ibid. Vol. 2. - Vol. 6. - - - - - in Poflhumrius - - - - - the motivesj growth, and fatal effeas of it admirably fbew'd in.Qthella. - - - - Vol. 6. Joy, excess produceth.Tears. Vol. I. Ingratitude, in Lucullus, Lucinr, Sempronir.. . - - - - Vol. y. Vo L. VI H h h h 2 Hen. 4. Richard. 2. , M.A. abt. No. ibid. Wint. Tale. M.W.ofl#indf. Ant. and Cleop. Mer. of Ven. Richard z. Richard 2. K. Lear. 2 Hen. 6. 3 Hen. 6. Richard 3. Tit. Andro. Cymbel. Macbeth. ibid. Richard 2. Richard 3. 2 lIen. 4 1 Heln. 4. He*. 8. 7Ttus Andro. 2 HIen. 4. 2 Gent. /er. M.IV. of lfindf IWint. Tale. Tro. and Cref. Cymbel. Othello. I . A.ab. Noth. Timon. A&. Scene. r i I 6 y y 3 9. io. 3 5 3 1. 2 I, I0 I. 3 3 8.9 4 I. 2Z .4 6' 8 6 2 3 4 3,4. y 6.7. Person. Leon. Ant. Pet. .1 StA. AJc. dal. Sol. Cleop. Pan. W~oL North. Leon. Leo. Pol. Eno. Gras. Dmah. B c. Gree:. Tit. Imog. Macd. Sey. Queen. Rich. Nor. Pro. Leon. King.
K I NG, of rafih ill Conduct, Richard 2. Vol. 3. - - - wife and valiant, Henry 4. - - - . Vol. 3. -- weak, cholerick, miserable, Lcar. ibid. - - - - - meek, religious, unfortunate in 1lenry 6. Vol. 4. - -- - - amorous, brave, fucccfsful, in Edward 4. - - - ibid. - - - - - bold, crafty, cruel, diflembling, in Richard 3. ibid. - - - - - brave, religious, fortunate, in Henry 7. - - - - ibid. L. L OVE, exprefs'd by a Soldier. - - - - - Vol. 3. - - - virtuous. Vol. 4- - - - - - - protested by Richard 3. - - - - - - ibid. - -- - - the first motions exprefs'd by len. 8. vid. Anne Bullen. - - - - - - by Miranda and Ferdinand. . Vol. i. S- - - the Crosses of it. ibid. - - - - - Appointment proteted. -- ibid. S- - - - its nature, ibid. - - - -- - Charm to enkindle it. - - - ---- ibid. - - - - in the Queen of Fairies, beautifully imagin'd, ibid. - - - - - given over. - --- - ---- ibid. - - - - - chang'd to aversion. ibid. - - - - - - commended and difprais'd. - - - ibid. - - -- - froward, and diflrembling. ibid. Love, expells all other passions. - - Vol. 2. - - - - its Original. ibid. - - - - its several Offices. - - - - ibid. - - - - all other pafflions loft in it. ibid. - - - - at first fight. - .------ -- ibid. - - -- in Man and Woman, compar'd, ibid. - - - - conceal'd, beautifully painted. ---- - - ibid. - - - - in a young brave General. Vol. 6. - - - -eonftancy in, protested. - - - - - - - quitted by a Soldier. - -- - its qualities. - - - - - - - - ibid. - - - - impatient of delay. - - - - - - - - - - - item..------ - - - - impatient of absence. Vol. 6. Lust. - - -- -- ---- Vol.i. - - - - in a grave Minilter of State. ibid. MJAdnefs, real in Lear, counterfeit in Edgar. VI.Melancholy . . . . . . - - - ----- several kinds of it. Mother, lamenting her Sons. ---..---------- item. Murtbherer, in Exton. PEdantry, in Sir Hughb Evans. - - - - - - - in Armado, Holofemrnes, Nathaniel. Princes, young and valiant, P. Henry and Lancaster. Prophetess, in Joan of Orleans. Pride. - - - - - Vol. 3. S Vol. i. Vol. 2. Vol. 4. - - ibid. Vol. 3. - - Vol. i. Vol. z. - - Vol. 3. Vol. 4. - - Vol. 6. Play. Richard z. I & 2 Iten. 4.' Lear. I. 2. 3Hcn. 6. 3 Hen. 6. ibid. Richard 3. ibid. Hen. y. 3 Hen. 6. Richard 3. Tempclt. Iidfi N. Dr. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. z Gent. Ver. ibid. lier. of Ven. As you like it. ibid. Twelfth Night. ibid. ibid. ibid. Tro. and Cref. Romr. and tJul. Othello. M.. of WISndf. Meaf. for Meaf. K. Lear. Comrn. of Er. As yon like it. Richard 3. ibid. Richard 2. M.ir. of Winds. Love's Lab. loft. I and z Hen. 4. I Hlen. 6. Tro. and Cref A&. IScene. 4 5- 5. 6 a 2 2 3 2, 3 2 7 i 3 2, 3 3 I 9 6 6 I 8 2 4 13 4 8. Io 2 4 12 y, &c. 7 Pcrfon. K. Hen. IWar. Lyf. Her. Her. Hel. Ob. Queen. l~cm. Lfyf Pal. Pro. Jul. Per. Rosa. Sil. Duke. Oli. Duke 1:ol. Vio. Tro. Tro.and Crc. Pat. Rom. Ju. Fri. Jul. Bian. So'g. Ang. Ulyf. Rage
R. R AG E, arising from Grief. vid. Northumberland. Vol. 3. Rage, arising in a Father from the undutifulness of his Chil- dren. - - - - - - - - ibid. - - - - - - in a Son for the murther of his Father, in Richard. V. 4. Rebel, crafty and timorous. Northumberland. Vol. 3. - - - - crafty and resolute. WVeflmorland. - - - ibid. - - - - brave and indiscreet. Hotspur. ibid. Revenge, implacable. SUperfition, in Glendower. - - - - Sifter, tenderly affe&ionate. vid. Isabel. V. V7 Iain, false, crafty, bold defcrib'd in Edmund. - - - the murtherers of Clarence. - - - Virtuous severity of Mind. W. WT IF E, lamenting her Husband. - - - a good one. vid. Catharine, Q. to Hen. 8. Wife, complaining of the unkindness of her Husband. - - - the ill effe&s of her Jealousy. - - - complaining of being forsaken by her Husband. Womankind, their Nature. - - - - - - - - - - - - item. SECT. Play. Lear. 3 Hen. 6. I and 2 Hen. 4. ibid. ibid. Vol. z. Mer. of Ven. Vol. 3. t Hen. 4. Vol. 3. Vol. 4. Vol. j. K. Lear. Richard 3. Meaf for Meaf. Vol. 4. Richard 3. Vol. i. ibid. Vol. T. Vol. I. ibid. III. INDEX of fi&itious Persons, with the Cha- radters afcrib'd to them. A. A Rviragus. vid. Guiderius. Anthonio, a cruel, false, ufurping Brother. Angelo, a icvere new Governor. Adriana, a peeviflh jealous Wife. - - Anthonio, a Friend. Adam, a grateful old Servant.- - - Sir Andrew Ague-cheek, a foolish Cowardly Knt. Apcmantus, a Cynic. - - - - - - Vol. i. ibid. - - ibid. Vol. 2. - - ibid. Vol. 2. - Vol. 5. BArnardine, an Athciflical harden'd Wretch. - - Vol. i. Benedick, Beatrice, two Satirical Wits. ibid. Bellarius, fortitude in disgrace. - - - - - Vol. 6. Com. of Er. ibid. Mackbeth. 2 Gent. Ver. Meaf. for Meafi Tempefl. Meaf. for Meaf. Corn. of Errors. Mer of Ven. As you like it. Twelfth Night. Teimon. Meaf. for Meaf. M. A.abt. Noth. Cymbeline. A. iScene. I 2 6 8 3. 5 2 3 2 II 7 Person. Ant. Gra. Lucio. Queen. Adr. Abb. L. Macd. Val. Ifab. Caliban, _ _ _
Clown. - - -.. Cloten, Infoleoce and,Folly. - - - Claudius, Blood, Incest, aId Usurpation Crejyida, a Mis. - - - TDEfdemonai Beauty and Innocence C ' Defderanas Chara&er. -------- --item. -----------.-- --item. ----------- -- - item. ---------------item. --------------- item. -------- --.- item. --- -------------- -item. - -. - Vol. 2. . -. ibid. - - - Vol. 6. ibid. - - - ibid. acrific'd to Jealousy. Vol. 6. ibid. - - - ibid. - - - - - ibid. . . . ibid. - - ibid. . . . . ibid. ..- - ibid. - - - - - ibid. EDmutd, a crafty, fie, enterprizing Villain. Egeffs, arne1 morose Father. - - As you like it. 7Twelfth Nigbt. Cymbeline. Hamlet. Tro. and Cref. Othello. Vol. 3. K. Lear. Vol.i. Midf. N..Dr. F. FAlflfa Sir j.oh, rel'lyes on an intrigue with Mrs. Ford, and r ~ yrs --P ^ p~gf. - *- - - Voi. i. ------his Bilet,Doo~. - -- -- fetes an Anignation with Mrs.,Quickly. - - - - - - - his Discovery of, it to Ford, difguls'd like Brooks. - -- - - his firflt address to Mrs. Ford. - - - - - - -- - furpr;is'd, and escapes in a Basket. - - - - - his Accountt of his being thrown into the 7Ihames. - - - - - - - another Afignation with Mrs. Quickly. - - - - - makes a full relaution to Ford of bis tormer ditfappintmncnt. - - - - - meets with Mrs2Ford, and is again furpriz'd. - - - --- escapes undifcover'd in the difguif9 of an 0Qld Woman. - - - - - his Soliloqtuy on this Occasion. - - - - . - - - - a Third Meieting fettled with Mrs. Quickly. - - - - he rilates tb Ford his late difappdintment. - - - - - - - he meets Mrs. Ford in WIindfor Park. - - - - - furpriz'd, and fenz'd by Mr. Ford. - - - - - -- -- his course of Life defcrib'd by P. Henry. Vol. 3. - - - - - he concerts a Robbery with the Prince. - - - ----- his Horse taken from him in the Adventure. -----inCuls; the Prince';.to, .onceal. his own Cowardife. - - -- - perfnates the King to chide .Prinqe Henry. - - - - - the Tavern Bill found- in his Pocket. - - - - - - - - - his raillery on Bardof's rcd.No.e. - - - -- his Quarrels with the H eIS. - , - - - - - - - his defc'ripti4n of his new-rins'd *Company. - - - - - his defcriptidn of Honour. - - - - - - - - - - his Behaviour in the Battle at Shrewsbury. S woupds Pency after he was dead, and ailumes the Merit of killing hin. - - - - - - - S- - - - he rails at his Page, the Price .and the Mercer. - reprinanded by the Chie, J.Juice. - arrested by VMrs.'. uickiy. ..- - 4 M.C of indf. , H inh.4. 2 lien.. 4. .1 I 2 2 4 5- 6 8 3 9 13 I4 7 7 *1i 8 9 8 9 ry 16 17 2 9 Ii 12 3 5 2, 3 9 12 5" y. 6 3 2 7.9 IO. II 4 5 I Bra. idem. Caf. id. and Jago. Jago. idem. Oth. idem.
Falfltaf, pleads before the Chief Justice. Vol. 3. - - - - - pacifies Mrs. Quickly, and borrows more Money. - - - - - - - his Letter to the Prince. - - - - treats Dol 'Tear/heet. - - - . - - - - - revenges her quarrel on Pifol. - - - - - furprlz'd with her by the Prince whilst he was railing at him. - - - - - - - - - - - - - inlifis Soldiers before Justice Shallow. - - - - his Chara&er of the Juflice. - - - - - - - - takts Colevile Prisoner. - - - - - his Encomium.on the virtues of Sack. - - - - - - - - -,his Character of Justice Shallow and his Family. - - - - receives News of Henry 4th his Death. - - - - S- - - - presents himself to Henry . - - - - reprimanded by the King, and order'd to the Fleet. - - - - - - - an account of his Sickness. - - - - - of his Death. - - - Fluellen, flout and choleric. Vol. 3. Florizel, conflant in Love. - - - - - - Vol. 2. Flavius, a frugal honest Steward. Vol. .. Fairies - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. 6. Friar ibid. G. Adj#ill, a Highwayman. - - - Gower, a good Officer. Gonzalo, an honest Councellor. - - - Guideriurs, and Arviragus, native Royalty exerting i vage life. Grave-digger. - - . - - - - itiell Vol. 3. Vol. 3. - Vol. i. f in a low 6a- Vol 6. - - ibid. H. L Ermia, conflant in Love. - - - - - Vol. x. .% He.ro, Innocence fcandaliz'd.- ibid. Hermione, wrong'd Innocence. - - - - - Vol. 2. Hamlet, an accomplifh'd young Prince unfortunate. Vol. 6. - - - - his Soliloquy on his, Mother's Marriage with his Uncle. - - - - - fees and converses with his Father's Ghost. - - - - - - - -- addresses himrelf to- Ophelia as a diftra&ted Person. - - - -- converses with Polonius. - - - - - - . - - - - with Rofmngcrofs and Guildenftern - - - - - his Soliloquy about his own delay to revenge his Father's murther. - - - - - . - - - - his Soliloquy whilst he meditated felf-murther, interrupted '*y Ophelia. - - - -- his Chara6ter by Ophelia. - - - - - - - - - - - his Advice to the Players about pronunciation and a&ion. - - - -- profefTeth his Friendihip to Horatio, with a detestation of flattery. ----- discovers the King's guilt by the Play. - - - - -- - -- banters the Messengers the K. and Q. sent to him. - - - - debates with himself whether he fhou'd kill the King at his Prayers. - - - - - - - - S- - - upbraids the Queen with her guilt, when the Ghost appears again to him - - - - - - - - - - examin'd by the King, banters him, and is order'd to go to England. - - - - - - - - . - - - - blames his own inaaivity S- - - converfeth with the Grave-maker, and moralizeth on the Sculls. - - - - - - VOL. VL J i i i Play. 2 Hen 4. Hen. 5. (Jyt. Tale. Timon.. Romeo and Jal. ibid. t Hen. 4. Ieriy s. Tempefl.  e. amletr. " Midf. . Dr. M. A. abt. Votb. Winter Tale. THamlet. - I A&.- 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, Scene. *2, 3 5' 5 6 7 5. 5" 7 9 4 3 y 7 8. 2 6 8 2 4 Perfoni Holr. Mer. Hamlet '" -,,,
fHamlet fights with Laertes in the Grave. - - - Vol. 6. - - - relates to Horatio the King's Order to have him put to Death in England. ----- banters a Fop who brought a Challenge from Laertes, and accepts it. .... -----asks Laertes pardon before they fight for his former raihnefs. ----- kills Laertefs, the King, and dies himself. Horatio, a fine Chara&er of Friendlhip. - - - - Vol. 6. I. RIS, or the Rainbow. - - - SJuno, the Bieffings of Marriage. Isabel, a Silter tenderly aftechionate. - - Don ohbn, an envious melancholy Vllain. 5afues, a melancholy Satyrical Charater. - - Imogen, distress in a beautitful Innocent Wife... Juliet, beautiful, constant, and unfortunate in Love. Jago, a consummate Villain. Katharine, a Shrew. - fAunce, a ClowVn. - .. Lu'io, a half-witted Rake. Leonato, a brave old Man, and a tender Father. Leontes, extreiamly Jealous. Lavinia, beaetiful, innoce&it, and greatly unfortunate. Laertes, the IDuties of a Son and a Brother. - M. MIllranda, beautiful and innocent. - - J Mrocbius (a Moor) his Person and Manners. Malvolio, a fantastical Steward. - - - Mercutio, quarrelfore. Nurse. Vol. r. ibid. ibid. ibid,. Vol. 2. Vol. 6. - - - ibid. ibid. Vol. I. ibid. ibid. Vol.2. . VoL y. Vol.6. Vol. x. VoL 2. - Vobi "VoL Q 0. ( Rlando, a younge Brother negle&ted by the Elder. Vol. 2. SOphelia, .Beauty and Innocence distrac&ted with Calamities. Vol. 6. Othello, his Service of imnportance to the State own'd byJags, ibid. - - - - owns himself of Royal Descent, and love the IoJe rnmoive of his marrying Defdemona. - - - - - - . - - feiz'd and iniilted by her Father - . - - accus'd by him before the Duke, he relates the whole progress of ,his Amour. - - - - - - - - - defcrib'd by Jago, of a temper easy and credulous. - - - his meeting at Cyprus with Defdemona. - " - - - - - - - Jago begins to work him up to Jealousy. - - - - his Soliloquy after it. - . - - - - - - - his Jealousy confirm'd, a beautiful Scene. ,. - - asks Defdemona for the Handkerchief, tells the virtues of it. - - - - his pafion work'd up by Jago till he falls in a trance, - - -liltens to Caffio's dircourfe with Jago. - - , - Play. Hamet. ibid. T~mpefl. ibid. Meaf. fr Me4f. A . .a/,s. Noth.. As you Sike it. Cymbeline. Rom. andJuliet. Othello. 2z Gent. Ver. .Meaf. for Meaf. A. d.abg. N.bt.e Winter Tale. .Titut Andr. - Hamlet. lempeff Mer. of Vei., ,.e lfiN F. Person. Vol. 2. I Tam. of the Sh. A&. ;cene. S I S 3 5 4 y $'. 4 3 4 3 4 6 8 6 6 8 S II 3 Vol.6. fwm. ard Jutl. As you like it. Hamlet. Qthdko.
Othello, wraught up to FIry, he resolves to murther Caio. - . - - - - - - - - strikes Defa4mion4. - - - - examines her and jEmilia, . - - - - - - kills Defdemowa. - - - * his bitter rerposfe after. - * - - - - he kaJs himneigf IJOf~sltbuaw, fond qnd j~alous.. g Ptvfp~a'r, # pgici~ia . Protheus~, ~fate to his }Friepd an4 Mbift~eLs. Parolles, ~a ty~ing ~cowardlT Captaizi; Pgda~rns a .He~BawcL - - Q. Qzuee1, ~mkpiqion, crpejty, and faW~Q~d. Defdemona and - - Vol. 6. Othello. - - - - - - - Vol. 6. Vol. 1i. - - - - ibid. Vol. z2. -.. ' VoL 6. - - - Vol. Ii. Vol. 6. R. ROfaligt beaitiful and witty. - - - Rea ol . pagfioqately tender, and unfortunate in Leve. STcorax, 8 Witch. - - - - Silvia, beatpiful and constant. Shylock, a Jew, cruel anS covetous. 'Hurio, a rich simple pretender to Love. - - - 1 Sir foby Belch, a Sot. Titus Andronicus, a ,rave Soldier and unfortunate Father. Zamora, 'id. Horror. fherifes, Fvy ind Calumny. - - " - - Play. Cymbelize. Temp. 2 Gest. VeF. All's weld, &c. TWe. and Cf. MW. of lFdf. I awd z Hen. 4. Cymbeline. Vol. . ,s yaoi like it. Vol- 6. 1~am..aud ul. Vol. I. ibid. Vol. 2. Vol. 1. Vol. 2. Vol. y. - Vol. 6. SEC T. IV.- IN DE X of Thoughts, or Sentiments. A Strology ridicul'd. - ----- A&ions to be carried on with Resolution. Authority, the ill privileges of it. - - Adversity, the Advantages of it. 13. "Aniihment (in Mowbray banif'd) - . - - Baniflment, comforted. Bastardy, defended. - . - , - * Vol. 3. Vo.4 Vol. i. - Vol. .. Vol. 2. Vol. 3. ibid. - ibid. -a Gent. Va. Mer. of Ven. z Gent. Ver. TwelfEt Night. Titus Andro. Tro. and Cref. Lear. Hen. 8.. Meaf for Meaf As you like it. Richard z. ibid. Lear. A61. Scene. 4 5- 4 6 4 8. 9 1F 6 1" 4 I , - Person. W ... Duke Sen Mowbray. Gaunt. Content r
C. ', ! , COntentin a private Life. - - - Croown, the pleasure of wearing one. ConCcience. - - - - - -C . - --- ' item. Calumny, ,unavoidable. - - - Ceremony. Vol. y. Changes, in firiendfhip and hate. - - - - ibid. Conspiracy, dreadful till executed, ibid. Cowards die often . - ... Conduc in War, superior to A&ion. - Vol. 6. Chrifmas, how the time is reverenc'd. - - - - - ibid. Courtship, advice to young Ladies how it (hould be aidmitted. ibid. Cuckolds make themnfelves. - . ..----- ibid. ,'YiWg Words, their force. - . - - -Day, happy. -- --- - unfortunate. - .. Death invok'd. Doubt and; Delay. - . Dependents, not to be too much trusted by great Men Duty exprefs'd with (implicity .accptable. - - - Death, the terrors of it. - - - - the desire of lov'd objeds heighten'd by it. - -- - a receiTary end, and fhou'd not be~fear'd. Delights, violent, ;not lafling. . Drunkenneifs, an unmanly vice - -. - - - E, Eclfpfes, their influence. - - - - F. Vol. 3. ibid. ibid. ibid. Vol. 4. ibid. Vol. I. ibid. - ibid. Vol. y. Vol. 6. - ibid. - - - Vol.4. ibid. - - - ibid. Sibid. - - - Vol. I. Vol. 3. ILear. FA&tion, how to be carried on. -- -- Vol. 3. ' -------- item. - ibid. Favourites of Princes, wretched. - - - - Vol. 4. Friendship, none obferv'd in Love. Vol. i. Fruition more languid than Expeaation. - - - - Vol. a. Fortune. - - - - - - - - - ibid. Friendship grounded on Interest chang'd with Fortune. Vol. 5". Fly, refleaions on the killing one. - - - - ibid. G. G OOD to be drawn out of Evil. - Great Men, their Favours uncertain. Greatness, fubje&t to Censure. - - - Gold, its power over Man. . -..-.--.--- . --- item. - - - - . -- ------- item. Greatness meets with Contempt when it declines. Gold, its power. t - - - -. ..- .. ---- item. Grief, immoderate difcommended. - - IlOnour, Man's greatest Treatore. Holy War. " - Vol. 3. Vol. 4. Vol. I. Vol. y. ibid. ibid. - - Vol.6. - - ibid. ibid. - - - ibid. I Hen. 4. ibid. - Hen. 8. M.A. abt. Notb. Mer. of ien. ibid. Titus Ando. Henry f. Richard 3. Meaf. for Meaf. Timon. ibid. ibid. Tro. and Cref. Cymbeline. Rom. and Jul. Hamlet. Vol. 3. Richard z. ibd. i Hen. 4. Play. 2 Hen. 6. 3 H'en. 6. Richard 3. ibid. Meaf. for Mea. Timo7. Coriolanus. Jul. Cefar. ibid. 7ro. andCref. Hamlet. ibid. Othello. Richard 2. K. John. ibid. ibid. Richard 3. Hen.-8. LMidf. N. Dr. Meaf. for Meaf. M.A.abt. Noth. Jul. Cafar. Ram. afsdjfl. Othello. A&. 4 I .I Y 3 I 4 2 2 I 1 I 4 2 3 3 3 4 2 5- 3 4 2 2 2 L I k 4. 5'.5 3 2, 2 4 4 3 4 3 4 4 4 + 3 2 I Scene. 9 4 6 6 6 3 I 4 V I V 13 I I a S. 3 2 1. 2 2 4 7 '3 7 r T I. 6 3 7 2 2 6 2. 3 3 6. 2 7 4 I 2 2 I Pertbn. Iden. Rich. z2 il. K. Rich. Duhe. Apem. Timon. Cor. Brftf. " B~m. CO~s Ulyf. Hor. Laer. Po, rEmil. Gaunt. K. Phil. Confi. Conji. K. Rich. Buck. Thef. Claud. Friar. c4f. Fri. Glio Wor. :K. Henr WPol. Claud. Sal: Gra;.- Ant. i Ser. Tit. iK. Hen,. Haft. Duke. Tim. iderm. idem. Achil. Clot. Ram. King. Mowlray. K. lien. Honour
Honoir. - - s - . - - - - - - - - defcrib'd. - - - - - new-made defcrib'd. - - - .---- ought to be confcr'd on Merit only. - - - - due to personal Virtue, not to Birth. - - - - - - continued at6s necessary to preserve its lustre. --ypocrily. fNgratitude. - - - Innocence. Imagination, strong in Lovers, SIngs, their Right divine. - - their Miseries - - - - - - - - - - - - item. - - - - - - - - - - - item. King-killing, detested. - LIF . - - - - - - - - the Necessaries of it are few. - -- -- unpleasant. - - - - - - - - - the vicissitudes of it. - - - - - - - moral refle&ions on the vanity of it. - - - - item. - - - - - - Libels against the State. Life, the shortness and vanity of it. - M. AN. - - - - - - Marriage. Mercy in Governors prais'd. - - Magistrate, the Duty of one. Mufick, different effe&s of it. - - Man's superiority over Woman. Mediocrity, the happieftitate. - - Mercy. Mufick, finely prais'd. - - - Marriage, alters the temper of both Sexes. Mind, not Dress, adorns the Body. - Melancholy the parent of Error. Man, the dignity of his Nature. - O ATH S, illegal not Obligatory. - - - - - - - - to Princes, little valu'd by their People. Ornament, a specious delusion. - - - - Opportunity, to be feiz'd on in all affairs. POwer, impotence of humane. - Poetry, Hotfpur's contempt of it. Pardons of Popes ridicul'd. - - - Poetry, prevalent with Women. VOL. VI. Vol. 3. ibid. - ibid. Vol. z. - - ibid. Vol. 6. ibid. - - - - - Vol. 3. Vol.4. Poets, and Madmen. Vol. 1. - - - Vol. 3. ibid. Vol. 4. ibid. - - - Vol. 2. - - Vol. 3. ibid. - - - ibid. - Vol. 4. Vol. i. - Vol. 2. Vol. y. - - - ibid. * - Vol. 3. Vol. 4. S - Vol. I. ibid. - - - ibid. ibid. Vol. 2. ibid. - ibid. ibid. ibid. Vol. y.. - Vol. 6. - Vol. 4. ibid. - Vol. 2. Vol 5. - - - Vol. 3. ibid. S- - ibid. Vol. i. Kkkk -l - Play. r Hen. 4. ibid. K. John. Mer. of PVe. All's well. Tro. and Crefl Hamlet. Lear. 2 Hen. 6. Midf N. Dr. Richard a. Hen. y. Richard 3. Hen. 8. WTint. Tale. I Hen. 4. Lear. K. John. Hen. 8. Meaf.for Meaf. As you like it. i't. Andro. Mackbeth. K. Lear. I Hen. 6. Meaf. for Meaf. ibid. ibid. Com. of Er. Mer. of Ven.. ibid. ibid. As you like it. 'amn. of the &c. Jul. Cafar. Hamlet. 3 Hen. 6. ibid. Mer of Fen. Jul. Cefar. Richard 2. I Hen. 4. K. John. z Gent. Ver. A&. I y I 2. 2 3 3 I 3 3 3 4 I I 3. 2 3 3 3 2 4 y 3 a2 3 4 2 I 4 4 4 2 Scene. 4 2 3 io 6 7 Iy 7 I z 5. 5. y 3 9 II 6 6 I 9 y 6 8 7 8 I 2 2 I 2 6 I 2 I 2 5" Person. Hot. Fal. Ar. ,. Pol. Lear. K. Hen. Thef. K. Richard. K. Hen. Brek. Cam. Hat. Lear. Lewis. IVol Dmke. Mac. K. Lear. Ifab. Duke. id, LuC. Ner. Per. Lor. Rosa. Pet. Mef Ham. Rich. K. Hen. Bass. Brut. Gaunt. Hot. K. John. Pro. Power
Power, abuse of it. - - - - - Paticr ce. - - - - - the Theory of it rarely praticable. Populace, factious and fickle. Providence directs our Acions. - - Preferment gain'd by Favour not Merit. Patience. - - - - - . R. SEligion, of great ife in Rebellion. - - SReputation. ,- - - ----- item. - - - - S. SPeech, haughty, difeommended. - - - Slander' flicks long. Speculation more easy than Pratice. - - Season, necdffary tc give every thing its perfe&ion. Study, difpr4is'dU - . - - - Solitude pre~err'd to a Court Life. Satire, not to descend to particular Persons. Solitude, a fine Description of it. Slander unavoidable. - - . T. THoughts, ineffeaual to moderate afflitions. - Thought.  Travel, advantage of it. - - - - - - - aFather's advice to his Son before going. iJrtue, to be employ'd for the Publick. - - -conspicuous, expos'd to Envy. Virtues and Vices chequer IMan's Life. Vitious Persons infatuated by Hcav'n. - Vol. i. ibid, - ibid. Vol. 5. - Vol. 6. ibid. - ibid. - - Vol. 3. Vol. 6. - - ibid. - - VTol. 3 Vol. I. - Vol. 2. ibid. Vol. 2. ibid. - - ibid. Vol. 6. - . ibid.. Play. Meaf. for Meaf. Corn. of ,Er. M. A. abt. Noth. Coriol. Hamlet. Othello. ibid. z Hen. 4. Othello. ibid. I Hen. 4. Comrn. of Er. Mer. of en. ibid. Love's Lab. loft. As you like it. ibid. Cymbel. ibid.. VoL 3. Richard 2. ibid. I Hen. 4. Vol. I. 2 Gent, Ver. Vol. 6. Hamlet. - - - - Vol. I. Vol..-2. - - ibid. Vol. 5. X7Ords give ease to Grief. - - - - - Vol. 4. World, the Vanity and Dissolution of it. Vol. I. ------ - -beautifully painted at large. Vol. 2. Wives, the Duty they owe to their Husbands. - - - ibid. - - - - advice how to chute, ibid. Meaf. for Meaf. As you like it.. Alts well, &c. Ant. and Cleop. Richard 3. Ynemp. As you like it. Tam. of the &c. Alis well, &c. Scene. :- .7 I 2. 3-4 I Is 3 '3 2 2 I I 1 I 7 3 3 6 9 4 4 6 2, 3 3 10 4 4 9 11 .5 Pc rfon. Ifab. Lcon. Mafr. tiara. Ham. Caf.. Jago. Mort. Jago. jago. Wor. Bal. Ner. Por. Biron. Duke Sen. Jaques. Bel. Pg.. Boling. Hot. . Val. Ant.. Pol. Duke. Adam.. i Lord.. Ant. Quleen.. Pro. Jaques. Kath. Duke.. SECT.
SEC T. V. SPEECHES. A TABLE of the mos considerable in Shake/pear. E X H 0 R1 AT O R T BIshop of Carlifle's in Defence of K. Richard. -- - Henry the Fourth's to the Prince before he dy'd Henry Fifth's to the Chief Juffice. - - - - - Canterbury's to excite Henry Fifth to begin a War. Henry Fifth's to his Soldiers. - - - - - S- - - - - to WIeftmorland. K. John's to Hubert to kill Arthur. - - - - Baflard's to K. John to fight the French. Joan of Orleans's to Burgundy to forsake the K. of En terefl. - - - - - - - - Cli/ford's to K. Henry, to fir hitn up to Revenge. Q. AMargaret to her Soldiers. - - - - - Richmond to his Soldiers, before the Battle of Bosworth. Richard the Third's, on the fame Occasion. - - VI TUP ER A TIVE. Vol. 3. ibid. - ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. - ibid. ibid. gland's In- Vol. 4. ibid. - ibid; ibid. - ibid. B Olingbroke to Buby on his Injuries receiv'd. - - - - V L. Gaunt's to K. Richard. Tork's to Bolingbroke, on Rebellion. - - - - - K. Henry to his Son. Worce/ler's to Henry Fourth. - - - - - - - Arch-Bishop of Tork's, on the inconflancy of the populace. i/efmorland's to the Arch-Bishop taking Arms. - - - Lancafer's, on the fame Subjed. K. Henry Fourth on Avarice. - - - - - ----- item to Prince Henry when he had taken the Crown. K. Henry Fifth to Fa/flaff. - - - - - - - - - - - - To Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, on their Conspiracy. The Conflable's and Grandpree's againli the Englijh. - - - K. Lear's againlf W'-imen. - - - - - abuse of Power. - - - - - Bailard Faulconbria.ge's againfl the French.. Ta/bot's to his Men rerreating. - - - V Suffolk's agai:fl D. Hripir . , '. K. Hcnry's to SAffolk, on DI. Hlimphrey's Death. - - - - Q. J'largaret's anIl Cver. ol. 3. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. 1ol. 4. ibid ibid. ibid. - - - - - - - - To Tbrk when taken Prisoner, and his Keply. ibid. Edw:.rd, and Clarence to Q. .iiraret. - - - - ibid. K. Hei",'s to Glscc/ler before he kill'd irn. ibid. Q. largaret's to Edward the Fourth's Queen, and the D. of Tork. ibid. Q. Catharine's to the two Cardinals. - - - - - ibid. fimon's to his false Friends. Vol. y. EX EC R ATIV E. RIchard the Second, to England on his Arriva!. - - Vol. 3. King Lear, againfi his Daughters. ibid. Suffolk on his Baniflment. . - - - - Vol. 4. Play. Richard 2. 2 Hen. 4. ibid. Hen. F. ibid. K. John. ibid. I Hen. 6. 3 Hen. 6. Richard 3. ibid. Richard z. ibid. ibid. I Hen. 4. ibid: 2 Hen. 4. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. Hen. y. ibid. K. Lear. ibid. K. John. I Hen. 6. 2 Hen. 6. ibid. ibid. 3 Hen. 6. ibid. ibid.. Richard 3. Hen. 8. T7imon. Richard 2. K. Lear. 2 Htfu. 6. Aa. 4 4 I 3 4 3 5- 3 2 y5 3 2 2 3 5. I 4 4 4 4 y 2. 4 4 4 5- 3 3 3 I 2 4 3 3 Scene. 2 II 3 2 2 8 8 3 . 6 6. I 2 8 4 I 6 2 4 II II 8 2 7 7 7 4 10 3 6 6 6 4 7 4 I 7 2 o10. II 8 i,: r
Lady Ann agfinfl Richard the Third. - - - Q. Zlargaret's againflt him, &c. 7imon's, on the Athenians. - - - - - - - - - - on Mankind. - . Coriolanus, on the People of Rome who banifh'd him. Vol. 4. ibid. Vol. j. Vol. 5. D EL IB ER A TIVE. K Richard in Prison. - -- - --- - Vol. 3. * Prince Harry's on resolving to leave his debauch'd way of Life. -- .- - - -- ibid. Lord Bardaolph's, on fighting with superior Forces. ibid. Burgundy's for Peace. - -. .. - - - - - ibid. The Citizenr's for a Marriage betwixt the Jauphin and Blanch ibid. Agamemnon's, Neftor's, ULyjfes's, on Achilles's desertion. Vol. . NA R R A TtIV E. jOrpur's to the K. about delivering Prilfoners. - - - Vol. 3. SS The Chief Junfice's Defence toK. Hen. . ibid. Exeter's, o[ the Death's of Tork and Sffdk. - - - ibid. D. of Tork', of a Battle. Vol. 4. Richard's, _f the D. of rorks fighting. - - - - ibid. Clarence's Dream of drowning, ibid. Norfolk's d dcription of the interview betwixt the K. of England and France. - - - - - - - - - ibid. K. Henry Eighth's on his Divorce. ibid. Antonio' Acecount of a Ghost appearing to him. - - - Vol. 2. P A THE TIC. SIchard II, on the Vanity of Power, and Mihery ofKings. - - - on the iarne, renouncing Greame-fs in Despair. At his renouncing the Crown. - - - - Lady Percy's to Hotspur. - - . - - -.- to Nortbhumberland. . . K. Henry Fourth, on the viciflitude of humane Affairs. P. Henry's Defence of himself. - K. Lear's in the Storm. - - - - - - - - - - to Cordelia. .- to her, dying. .. Confiance's to Salisbury. . -.... her Speeches on the lofTs of Arthur. - - Salisbury's on taking Arms againfl his King. Suffolk's to Margaret, in love with his Prifbner. - - - Ienry Sixth's on D. Humphrey's disgrace. Suffolk, and Q. M2argaret, parting. .. Edward Fourth on the Murther of Clarence. D). of Buckingham's ifter Condemnation. - - - Q. Catharines, before her Divorce. Cardinal iolfey's to Cromwel. .. . Q. Catharile's, recommending her Daugher to the Kirg. Helena's, on her Husband's flying from her to the War. - Hermione's defence when impeached of Adultery. lI. Antony's on Ca/far's Murther. - - - - --. ---his Funeral Oration over the Body. S 0 L IL 0 U I ES. K Henry the Fourth, on want of leep. - - - - Pr. lIenry, on the Troubles attending Greatness. Hfenry Fifth, oi the Mitcrics of'Kings. - - Vol. 3. ibid. - ibid. ibid. - ibid. ibid. ibid., ibid. ibid.. - ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. Vol. 4. ibid. - ibid. ibid. - ibida ibid. ibid. ibid. Vol. 2. ibid. Vol. 5. ibid. Play. Richard 3. ibid. Trimon. ibid. Coriol. Richard 2. i Hen. 4. 2 Hen 4. Hen. F. K. John. Tro. and Cref I Hen. 4. 3 Hen. 4. Hen. y. 3 Hen. 6. ibid. .Richard 3. Hen. 8. ibid. Wrnt. 7tale. Richard 2. ibid. ibid. I Hen. 4. 2 Hen. 4. ibid. ibid. K.2 Lear. ibid. ibid. K. 7ohn. ibid. ibid. i Hen. 6. z Hen. 6. ibid. Richard 3. Hen. 8. ibid. ibid. ibid. Ail's well, &c. Winter Tale. Jul. Cafar. ibid. Vol. 3. 2 Hen 4 ibid. ibid. - ibid Hcnry y. 4 6 3 6 6 2 II 2.3. 5 10 JO 7 Y 2 4 3 8.9. I 2. 6 6 2. 4 2 3.4 6
On new-made Honour, by the Baflard. - - - - On Self interest, by the fame. D. of Tork's on the surrender of Anjou to the French. - - - - - - - -:on his design to seize the Throne for himself. Young Cliford on the Death of his Father. - - - - K. Henry's on the Happiness of low life. - ..- - - -after he loft the Battle, on his Q. going to France. Gloucefler's on his deformity, and ambition - - - - WVarwick's dying Speech. Richard the Third's on his deformity. - - - - - fiTrrel's on the Murther of K. Edward's two Sons. - - - - Richmond's the Night before a Battle. Richard the Third, in despair. - - . - - - Cardinal WIolfey's on the vicissitudes of life. Profpero's to the Spirits. - - - - - - - Angelo's on temptation to Lult by a virtuous Beauty. Iachimo's looking on Imogen asleep. - - - - Pofthumus's against Women. - - - - - Romeo's over Juliet in the Vault. The King's, despairing of Pardon for Incest and Murther. - 7ol. 3. ibid. Vol. 4. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. rol. I. ibid. Vol. 6. - 'Play. K. John. ibid. z Hen. 6. ibid. ibid. 3 Hen. 6. ibid. ibid. ibid. Richard 3. ibid. ibid. ibid. Hen. 8. tempest. Meaf for Meaf Cymbeline. Vol. 6. Rom. and - ibid.\ Harmlet. N. B. t'be Speeches in Julius Caesar, Antony and Cleopatra, Mac- beth, Hamlet, and Othello,. are chiefly plac'd under the Titles of those Plays. SEC T. VI. IN DEX of Descriptions, , I. Descriptions of Places. B. Bank, flowry. - - - - Dover Cliff - - - - - - E. England celebrated. - - - - - - - difprais'd by the Constable of France. - - - - defcrib'd in its situation. - - - - - - - only conquer'd by intefline Divisions. - - - - its Interest in relation to France. - - - - its situation. - - - - - F. A Field after a Battle. G. or Images. Jul. . Vol. I. IMidf N. Dr. Vol. 3. K. Lear. Richard 2. Hen y. K .John. ibid. 3 Hen. 6. ymbeline. Vol. 3. Hen. S. Vol. 3. Richard W. I 2. I 3. y. 2 3 3 I -4 5 3 2 2 3 Scene. 6 6 I 3 3 4 6 2. 8 2. 7 4 9 4 6 J I ( I 4 A 14 *Per~ian. r * A '4 *1 lb1. ~d~g. i~aMwt. 0*p. ~ftount. V 0 L. VI ]Li 1ahlte - - Vol. 3 ibid. - - - ibid. - - - ibid. Vol. 4. - - Vol. 6. i, ~N4rcik. ]lechanQed GlorE/i~erFire. ~' oL. VI
Inchanted ilte. APothecary, his Poverty and BEautiful Maid. - - A Bishop in Arms. - Bedlam Beggars. Beautiful Person petitioning. A Bailiff. - - - COmmons of England. -- -- - their Inconfancy. Courtier, an unfuccefsful one. - Cheats, several forts. ... Conitables and Watchmen. Courtier, humouroufly defcrib'd. Candidate for an. Office. - A. Shop defcrib'd. - - Play. Vol. . TempeJi. Vol. 4. ZHen. 6, Kent. - - Lombardy. Nile, its flow defcri'd. Vol. a. Taming oftheSh. Vol. y. Ant. and Cleop. Vol. z. Taming of heSh. Vol. 3. 1 H'n. 4. - ibid. Hen. y. Vol. 3. I Hen. 4. Vol. 4. Richard 3. The Severn. - Saliqtue Land. - T2rent,. at Button. irower of London. Vale, a dark and melancholy one. - - Vol. y. Titus Alrm. I Rom. and Jutl. . ..- - Vol. 2. ..Vol. 3. ibid. . . . Vol. i. - - - . . - - ibid. Vol. 3. ibid. Vol. 4. Vol. I. Taming oftheSh. 2 Hen. 4. Lear. z Gent. yer. Corn. of Errors. Richard 2. 2 Hen. 4. Hen. 8. Com. of Er. ibid. ibid. Vol. 2. As you like Vol. ". Coriolanus. A&.| Scene 2 6 I 7 I 4 2 I I 5. i 6 2 7 5" 4 8 6 3 5- z4 6 Y II. Descriptions of Persons. Person. CaL Say. Lucenti: Luc. Hot. Ca^t. Hot. Ron,. Pet. W]. Edgar. Pro. S. Dro. Bagot. Tork. Old L. Ant. Clo. Cor. A _ ._ __ __ Pisa.
A Deform'd Person. - - - - - - - Vol. 3. A dying Person by Poison, in K. John. ibid. - - - - - of old age, in Prison, in Mortimer. - Vol. 4. - - - - - - by strangling, in D. Humphry. ibid. - --- -- in Agonies of Despair, in Cardinal Beauford. ibid. Drunken Men. - - - - - - - - Vol. i. Dying of Grief. Vol. 2. Debtor. - - - - - - - - - - Vol. y. Duellist. Vol. 6. Death; in a beautiful Face. - - - - - - ibid. - - - - item. ibid. - - - - item. - - - - - - - - - - ibid. ENglijbmen in preference to the French. - - - - - - - defcrib'd by the French. - - -- - -- ridicul'd for following French Fathions. - - - - - - for hard Drinking. F. A Foppith Courtier. - - - Flatterers of great Men. Fairies. - - - - - - - - - - item. Fairy-Mafquerade. - - - Fortune-teller. Fairies, Mab the Queen of. - - G. General, leading a Vi&orious Army. H Ypocrite. ..- - - - item. - - - - - - item. Rijhmen.  A Justice. A Jeiter. K IN G, a good one defecrib'd. Knights of the Garter. Kentijhmen. . - - - King, a good, L. LOver, banifh'd. Lovers, humouroufly defcrib'd. Lovers parting. Lover, defcrib'd. - - - Vol. 3. Vol. 4. - ibid. Vol. 6. - - - - - Vol. 3. ibid. - - - - - Vol. x. Vol. 6. - - - - - Vol. I. ibid. - - - - - Vol. 6. Play. K. 3ohn. ibid. I Hen. 6.. z Hen. 6. ibid. Tempef/. All's well, &c. Timon. Rom. and Jul. ibid. Cymbeline4 om.and Juliet. Hen. y. I Hen. 6. Henry 8. Othello. I Hen. 4. Lear. Midf. N. Dr. Rom. and JNl. MW. of linds. Corn. of Er. Romeo and Jul. Vol. 5. \ Coriolancss. - - - - Vol. 4 ibid. - - - - Vol. 6. - - Vol. 3. Vol. 2. - - - ibid. - - - - Vol. y. Vol. 4. - - - - - ibid. ibid. Vol. 6. - - - ibid. ibid. - - Vol. . Richard 3. ibid. Rom. and Jul. Richard z. As you like it. rwelfth Night. Macbeth. I Hen. 6. 3 Hen. 6. ibid. Rom. and Jul. ibid. Cymbeline. As you like it. A., 2. 2. 3 3 4 4 2 2 4 4 3 1 I I I I 4 I 3 3 2. 3 4 4 I 4 3 2 I 7 9. 10 6 6 9.l< 3 i 10 4 2. 4 8 6 1o 4 6 4 6 4 6 4 3 9 4 4 9 Ps 2. 5. Person. Cuf.- WIar, dri. x Lorad Sen. .Mer., Cap. Arv. Rom, K. Hen. Jago. Hot. Kent. Mers, E. Ant, Mer. Conw.. Glo. Glo. Buck. J/- K. Richard. J ses. Talb. Tork. K. Hen. Ros... Mer. Sil. and Clo.. Lovesj .
Lover, defcrib'd. - - - - - - Vol. i. - - - - item. ibid. - - - - constant. - - -- ~ -- - - - - - -- - ibid. - - - - banifh'd. ibid. - - - - in Solitude. - - - - - - - - - - - - - ibid. Lover defcrib'd. Vol. 2. Lovers parting. - - - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. 6. M. TiEflenger, with ill News. - -- - ----- Vol. 3. - - - - item. ibid. - --- - with good News. - - - - - - - - - ibid. A Mad-man. A Miserable Mother in Conflance. - ------- - - - Edward the Fourth's Widow. Mermaid. - - - - - - - Melancholy-man. ibid. - ibid. Vol. 4. Vol. x. Vol. 6. Play. 2z Gent. Ver. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. As you like it. Tro. and Cre:f. 2 Hen. 4. K. John. 2 Hen. 4. K. Lear. K. John. Richard 3. Midf . . Dr. Hamlet. Ews-tellers. ------ ------ Vol. 3. I K. John. A Nun. Vol. I. Midf. N. 0-. O Ld Man opprefs'd with cares. - - - - - - - vigorous, from temperance in Youth. Old Man in the extremity of decay. Old Men fubje& to ingratitude. P. POft-Meflenger. - -- -------- . -....- - - - - fee the fame defcrib'd. Pedants, in Armado, Holofernes, 2NathanieL. - - - - Q. A Quarrelsome Person. - --- -- Vol. !. Vol. 2. ibid.. Vol. 5. Vol. 3. ibid. Vol. 2. Vol. 6. Oldier young, brave and unpolifh'd. - - - - - Vol. 6. Soldiers in Armour. Vol. 3. Serving-man. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ibid. Sea faring Persons in distress. Vol. i. Savage-man. - - - id. Caliban. ibid- Swimmer - - - - - - - - - - - - -. . Vol. 5. Soldier. Vol. 2. School-boy. - -- - ----- - - ibid. Shepherd. ibid. T. TWins, their likeneis defcrib'd in the two Antipholis's and Dro- mio's - ----------Vol. I. Talkative Coxcombs. Vol. 2. Trojans. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. 6. V Illains look. - - - - - - - - - - - - - Comrn. of Er. As you like it. ibid. 7Tmon. 2 Hen. 4. Lear. Love's La. loft. Rorm. and Jul. Tro. andCref. I Hen. 4. K. Lear. Temp. ibid. Jul. Cifar. As you like it. ibid. ibid. Corn. of Er. Mer. of Ven. Tro. and Cref. A&. 2 2 2 3 S 3 4 I 2 4 4 3 4 2 2 4 z I 2 2 2. 2 3 4 4 3 I 2 I z 2 2 3 3 I 4 Scene. I 7 o10 3 4.6. 3 7 9 4 4 2 6 4 I 6 3 "9 5. 2 8 8 2 6 2 I 3 9 9 3 6 6 ^4 Perfton. Speed. !kE. Val. idemt. Rosa. Norrth. Conft. K. Hen. Cord. K. Phil. Queen. ob. Ham. Hub. Tihe. I~ on. Ada~m. Jaques. Tim. irav. Kent. MIer. W. Ver. Edgar. Pro.- Fran. Ca]: Javues. idem. Lor. Pehmb. K. John. Witc: Vol. 3. 1 K. rOkr7.
w. WXTItch. Wid. Sycorax. SV 'Woman of a Satirical Wit. S- - - - - - - - - - - - - - item. Wife, a good one. - - Woman's Man. Witches, and their Charms. - Woman, a lewd one. S- - Vol. I. ibid. - - - - Vol. 2., ibid. S - - Vol. 5. Vol. 6. V Oung Gentleman, an accomplih'd. - - - - - - Vol. I. - - - - - item. Vol. 6. Youth, a pert Pretender. - - - - - Vol. z. Younger Brother, kept without Education. ibid. Youth, a beautiful one defecrib'd. - - - - - - - - - ibid. Young Lady playing on the Lute and singing. Vol. r. Youth, a pert one. - - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. 6. - - - - two of Royal Birth. ibid. III. Descriptions of Things. A. A N Army disbanded. - - - - - - - - Embarking. S- - -. Enghf]j, new-rais'd. - - Angling. Ambitious Love. - - - - - - - - - Art and Nature; vid. Nature. Angling, Cleopatra's. - - - - - - - B. Eauty. wid. Bulken, Anne. - - - item. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - negleded. - - - - - defcrib'd by Romeo. - - - - - .'Hallenge, the Ceremonial of one. - - Combat in the Lifts, its Ceremony. Coronation, the Caremonies of one. - - D. D Enial of Favours. Diamond-Ring. Death. - - - - - --- - ,- - - Dreams. Vo L. VI. - Vol.3. 1 ibid. - - - - ibid. Vol. 1. - - - - Vol. 2. Play. M.A. abt. Noth. ibid. Mer. ofVen. Love's Lab. loft. Macbeth. Tro. and Cref. SGent. Ver. Cymbelde. Mer. of Ven. As you like it,. ibid. Titus Andr. Cymbeline. ibid. 2 Hen. 4. Hen. . K. John. M.A. abt. Notb. All's well, &c. Vol. ?. Ant. and Cleop. - - - - Vol. I ibid - - - - - Vol. 6. - - - - Vol. 3. ibid, - - - - Vol. 4. - - - Vol. y. ibid. - - - Vol. 6. ibid. Mmmm Temp. 2 Gent. Ver. Rom. and Jul. Richard 2. ibid. Hen. 8. Timon. 7Ttus Andro. Cymbeline. Rom. and Jul. 2z 4 3 x 3 6 " 7.8 4 8 y5 I 1 2 Person. iene,. Hero. Biro,. Ulyf. VaL I Gear PFor. Orla. Phe. Mar. Bel. Haft. Chorus. Chat. Urf Hel. Per. Jul. 3 Gent. Flav. Mar, .her.
"Ntfry.of K. Richard'and Bolingbrqke into London. J-* Earthquake. - - - - - - Entry of Coriolanus into lome after Viacry. a- - nd's - Pmpey's.' - Earth andits produds. FAfliion;, of Italy, &c. - - Face of a Person near Death. - - - - -ill-favour'd. - - Friendihip betwixt two young Ladi Friend. ., - - - Fortune, and her Votaries. Family, ruin'd by proftifenefs, Ratitude in an Qld Servant. - - cintle Temper. H. fIPrite, Richard's rode by Bolingbroke. " Hounds, and Hunting defcrib'd. Houic-lieeping, riotous. - - Houids,'-lorfes, Hunting. Hu icaane . . i - . . Horror in one buried alive. Vol. 3. ibid. Vol. . - - ibid. Vol. 6. - - - - - - - Vol.3. Vol. 4. --- - " - - Vol. i. S.* . ibid. - - - - Vol. 2. Vol. 5. - - - - -- ibid. SVol. 2. Vol. 6. - - - - Vol. 3. Vol. i. - - Vol. -f. ibid. - Vol. 6. ibid. INfurrecion of the Populace.------- Interview of the Kings of Englandand France. Jelts 'anld Jeder .... Invention, a dull one. Jealousy defcrib'd. -- -- - - K. lng's-.Evil, and its cure. - - - - - Kingdom, oppreft by an Usurper. L. Vol. 3. Vol. 4. Vol. 2. Vol. 6. - ibid. Richard z. I He. 4. Cortiol. Jul. Cefar. Rom. and Jul. Richard 2. Hen. 8. Temp. Midtf N.Dr. Mehr of Ven. h'imon. ibid. As you like it. Hamlet. Richard 2; Midf. N. Dr. 'Timon. Tit. Andro. gro. and Cref. Rom. and JAul. Richard z. Hen. 8. Love's Lab. loft. Othello. ibid. Vol. \. Mackbeth. ibid. I ibid. LOve,' humouroufly defcrib'd. - Vol. 2. - - improves all our Faculties. ibid. - - - - fantaitical.---. - . ibid. Lonefs. ibid. Life, i, pleasant one defcrib'd. -----i.bid. - - - in a wild solitude. V - . i. . ~Vol. g.. Love'sLab. loft. ibid. ibid. SAs you like it. 7iTam. of the &c. Timon. .3. I. 4 I. 4 I 2 I 8 I a 3 2r [ 3 II z 3 r 3 I Z 4 10 S. 5. p f Y 3 4 10 no 6 4 6 Hdk: ' Bra. F g/sr.; Friar. Tork. Pat. Gon,.. Hel. Bast. Por. Poet. Adam. King. Thef. hlp. Flay. Tro. Jul. Scroop. Rosa. Jag. id. and 0th. Kat. Rojffe. Biron. idem. idem. Oi. Lord. Apem. Malqu 2;0 Jr. Biroop. idem. idem. O/i. Lord. /dpecamq
* : M. MfU Afque, rural. - 2 - - - - - - - - - Lv Moon. .... - - - - item. - - - - - - - - - - Masquerade, a Scene of one. Moon. - - - - - -- - - - - Mufick. Martlets Nests. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Madnefo for grief and love, in Ophflia. N. N Ature, State of. - - - - - -- - - - - - Nature and Art. 0. Oak, large, old. - - - - - - - - - - - - -- Vol. I. ibid. ibid. ibid. Vol. 2. ibid. Vol. X. Vol. 6. Play. 7empefl. \Vidf. NV. Dr. ibid. 21V. Anb. Notb. As you like it. Twelfth Night. Mackbeth. Hamlet. Vol. t.empeeft. Vol. z. IWin. Tale. Vol. r. PArting of Lovers. - - - - - - - - - Vol. 6. Popularity. Vol. 3. Pride.------------------ ibid. Peace. ibid. - - - - after Civil War. - - - - - - - - - - ibid. Prod:gies. ibid - - - - - item. - - - - - - - - - - - - ibid - - -- - item. ibid - - - - - item. - - - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. .'" Peace. Vol. 4. - - - - betwixt Tork a'd Lancafer. - - - - - .. - ibid. Play, a bad one defcrib'd. Vol. I." Piaure of a beautiful Woman. - - - -. - - - Vol. 2. Pi&ures of Adonis, Venus, lo, Daphne and Apollo. ibid. Poetry. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. f. Prodigies. ( ibid. - - - - - tem. - - - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. 6. Poison. ibid. R. R Umour. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - item. Roses, Red and White, the Badges of two Parties. - - Vol. 3. ibid. Vol. 4. S. A ong e - - - - - - - - - - - - vol. 3. Sleep. ibid. Signs of change in Government. - - - - - - - - Vol. 4. Sleep. Vol. i. a Stream beautifully defcrib'd. - - - - - - - - - - ibid. Sleep, found. ibid. Stag, in the Chafe. - - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. 2 Snake.? ibid. Sound sleep. - - - - - - - - - - Vol. 5". Storm at Sea. - Vol. 6. Aryou like .it. Rom. and W7aL. Richard 2. ibid. ibid I Hen. 4. Richar. a. iHen., 4. a Hen 4. Jul. Cafar. Richard 3. ibid Midf N. Dr. Mer. of Ven. fam. of the &c. 7imon. Jul. Casfar. Hamlet. ibid. z Hen. 4. ibid. I Hen. 6. I Hen. 4. 2 Hen. 4. Richard 3. Midf. N. Dr. 2 Gent. Ver. Meaf.for Meaf As you like it. ibid. Jul. Cafar. Othello., .A. IScene. 4 1 i I 2. I I 4. 2 4 '4 3. *1 I I I 2 * .3 4 I S. S. 3 i in 3 2 3 3 2. 3 2 4 a 4 2 i 2 3 I 3 2 a2 I 8 J. 7 I 6s 7. 7" 4 4 I I 9 6 7 I 4 4 I the 2. S I 4 9 JO 6 I 6 x2 I Perfoa. 'Orla. Duke. - King. j. Gon. Pol. Per? . . .! 01. K. R;id. idem. idem. K. Hen. Cafe.' Ridb: *Philof.:- Bast. Poet. Calbph. Horat. 4ar. Indu&ion. War. Mart GIe. K. Hen. 3 Cit. Ob. Jul. Claud. I Lords BrTFt. Time,
Time, the seeming inequality of its motion. VIion, of good Spirits. Virginity. . Viory long disputed. - - - - - and putfuit of the conquer'd. Play. Vol. 2.1 As you like it. - Vol.4. Vol. 2,. S- - Vol. 5. Vol. 6, W. W AR, the pognolhicks of it. - - - - preparation for. - - - - -- ill effeas of. -- --- -. . - item. - - - - Vol. 3. ibid. - - - - - ibid. Vol. 4. A Wreck. - - - -- - - - -Vol. I. -. - itenm. ibid. - - - - - defcrib'd by a Clown. - - - - - - - Vol. 2. White Hand. ibid. Wonder proceeding from sudden joy. - _-- - - - ibid. White Hand. Vol. 6. Defiriptions of Times and Seasons. V E A R, unfruitful and sickly. - U Spring. Winter. - - - - Dy-brek. item. . .. .-.- item. - - -- - - item. - it - - - - - iem. - - - - - - item. --- - item.- ------ ------ item. -...item.------- -- item. Morning. ------- A low'ring Morning. . ,- - - --------Clear. - - Morning. - - item. ------ A pleasant Morninig. - * - -----.--- item. - - - Sun-rifing. - - - - - item.- ------ Evening, a fair one. Twilight. ' - - - -- item. Night, in a Camp. - - - - - - - stormy. Midnight. - - - - - - item. - - - - Vol. i. Vol. 2. - - - - ibid. ibid. - - - - Vol. ?. Vol. 4. -- - -- - - ibid. Vol. i. ibid. Vol. 6. - ibid. ibid. -Vol. 3. ibid. Vol. . vol. z. ibid. Vol. -. S---------Vol. 6. Vol. y. -Vol. 6. Vol.4. - - - - - Vol. 3. Vol. 5. Vol.3. ibid. - ibid. Vol 4 Henry 8. All's-well, &c. Mackbeth. Cymbel. Richard 2. - Hen. 5. ibid. 2 Hen. 6. Tiempeft. Corn. of Er. 1/ut. Tale. ibid. ibid. Tro. and Cref. Midf. N. Dr. *Love'sLab. loft. As you like it. Love's Lab. loft. i1 Hen. 4. i Hen. 6. Richard 3. Midf. N. Dr. M. A. abt. Noth. Tro. andCref. Rom. and Jul. tHamlet. Richard 2.. I Hlen. 4. 3 Hen. 6. Tempefi. .Midf. N. Dr. Titus Andro. Rom. and Jul. Tit. Andro. Rom. and tid. Richard 3. K. John. Macbeth. Hen. 5. K. Lear. K. John. 2 Hen. 6. A& .Scene A.8 3 8 4 1 I 3 I i 5 2. *2 I I 3. I 5 3 S S I I I 3 7 4 7 Yl y :S. S 2. 2 5r 10I 2 I 5y 10 3 3 z 3 5 3 3 9 y 8 4 2 3 7 I I 3 2 5. I 2 I 5 3 3 9 2 4 2 4 2. I I 2 5 3 5" 6 3 4 4 I 3 1.2 3 5 - 8 Pcrfon. Rosa. Par. Captain. Ciorasr. Burg. J1r c, lMer. Sri. .Egeon. Fle. 3 Gent, &c. Tro. Zueen. Dtnhe Sm.pl Song: Glend. Bed. Stcn. Puck. Pedro. 7To. Ifor. Richard. K.andP.H. Rich. Pro. Ob. Tarm. Fri. dar. Ben. M1orn. Rich. MIelun. I Mgtr. Chorus. Gent. Kent. K. Jobn. Boling. Night,
Midnight. - - - - - Night. - - - item. - - - a beautiful description of a Moonlight. - - - tempeltuous. - - - - - - - - - item. Night. - - - - - item. - - - - item. Mid-night. Vol. 4. Vol. I. - ibid. Vol. 2. Vol. j. ibid. - - ibid. Vol. 6. - - ibid. ibid. SEC T. VII. INDEX of some Similies and Allusions, A. Uthority, compared to a Farmer's Dog. - Vol.3. Anger, to a high-mettled Horie. Vol. 4. - - - - - - - to boiling Water. - - - - - - - - ibid. Ambition, to the Dream of a Shadow. Vol. 6. B. A Doubtful Battle, to a Swan swimming against a Stream. Vol.4. - - - - - - - - to a Cloudy Morning and a Stormy Sea. ibid. Beautiful Maid, to a Siren. Vol. I. C. rOurage compar'd to a Faulcon. - - - - - - - - to a Captive set free. Contention, to a Horse broke loose. Consideration, to an Angel. Catharine, Queen, to a Lilly. A Crowd dilpers'd, to wild Geefc. Courtfliip, the degrees of it compar'd to Dances. - - - - D. Dissimulation to a Snake. - - - - - - - - - Vol. 3. ibid. ibid. ibid. Vol- 4. Vol. i. - ibid. Play. a Hen. 6. Mid. N. Dr. ibid. Mer. of Ven. Jul. Cafar. Mackbeth. ibid. Tro. and Cref. Rom. and Jar. Hamlet. K. Lear. Hen. 8. ibid. Hamlet. . lenl. 6. ibid. Comr. of Er. Richard z. ibid. 2 Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen. 8. Midf N. Dr. M. A. abt. Nooth. Vol 4. 2 Hen. 6. E. ENgland to an Eagle, Scotland to a Weazel. - - - Vol. 3. Q. E2lizabetb, to the Maiden Pbhanix. Vol. 4. F. FAther (good) of a bad Son, the clear Spring of a muddy ftreamn. - - - - - - - - - - - Vol. 3. V o. VI - nnn Hen. 8. Richard 2. A&. Scene. 4 I 3 8 5 3 5y I i 6 3 3 3 7 2z a 6 6 6 2. 4 4 I I I 4 I 3 2 8 7 Person. Capt. Her. Puck. Lor. Por. Cafc. Len. OldM.& R. Mac. Achil. Han. Lgar. iNor. idem. Guild. Tork. K. Hen. - S. Ant. Boling. SIlowbray. North. Cant. Queew. Puck. Beat. Ely. Cran. Boling. Favourites,
- - - - - to Honey-fuckles excluding the Sun. G. ( Arden, compar'd to Government, in disorder. J Government, to Bees. Glory, to a circle in the Water. ------- General, an Old, to a Winter Lion. H. lJEnry P. comparing himself to the Sun in Clouds. - - - - to rich Oar in a dark Soil. - - - - - to Mars. - - --_---to a Strawberry growing among Weeds. Heart, a penitent one, to a ripe Mulberry. - - INfurre&ion to a Storm. -. --- to Bees. K. James I. to a Cedar. Vol. 1. - Vol. 3. ibid. - Vol. 4. ibid. Vol. 3. ibid. - ibid. ibid. - Vo. y. - - - - Vol. 3. Vol. 4. - - - - ibid. King Richard, compar'd to a falling Star and the setting Sun. - - - - - - - - Vol. 3. King's return to his Country compar'd to a Mother's meeting her Child.- --- ------- - bid. L O V E, compar'd to a canker in a Bud - - - to April Weather. ------to a waxen Image. - - - Lover, to a Camelion. Love compar'd to a Figure on Ice. - - Lover fuccefsful, to a Conqueror. - - - his thoughts, to the inarticulate Joys M. Mind, in doubt, compar'd to the Tide. Maids, to Flies. O. Opportunity, to the Tide. - - - - - P. Promises, to the Garden of Adonis. - - ? - :-- - - Vol. r. ibid. -. - - - - ibid.. ibid. .. - ibid. Vol. 2. of a Crowd. - - ibid. 2 Hen 4. ibid. Hen. 8. Richard 2. ibid. 2 Gent. ler. ibid. ibid. ibid. ibid. Mer. of Ven. ibid. M. .abt. Richard 2. Hen. f. i Hen. 6. z Hen. 6. x Hen. 4. Hen. r. P Hen. y. Coriol. Noth. rol. 3 3 I I I 3 2 3 .5 2 I .3 I I 2 3 3 3 2 3 5. 4 i 7 2 6 7 3 I 5. II 6 8 Ii 2 I 4 7 I . 2 2 6 5. 5. H-ero. Cant. PuceL. Tork. P. Hen. Ely. Vol. Pr. Hen. War. Cran. Salif: K. Rich. Pro. Val. Pro. idem. Speed. Duke. Bass. idem. North. Burg. Brutt Vol. 3. 2 Hen. ibid. \ Hen. y. - Vol. . Jul. Ca/far. - Vol. 4. i Hen. 6. Dan, Rcbelh
R. SEbels, returning to Allegiance, compar'd to a Flood. - Rcafon returning, to the Morning. - - - - - - S. S U N riling in a cloudy Sky, to K. Rich. in discontent. Sun rising after a dark Night, to the Restoration of King. - - - - - - - - Spies, to lim'd-twigs. Soldiers, to Bees. - - - - - - - - T. TReason compar'd to a Fox. - - - - - - - - Tears, to Dew on a Lilly. W. Orcefler E. of, in Rebellion, compar'd to a Meteor. lWarwick's Death, to the fall of a Cedar. - - - - Wolsey, Cardinal, to a falling Star. Wanderer, to a drop of Water in the Ocean. - - - - World, compar'd to a Stage. Widow, to a Turtle. - - - - - - Y. D. of rork fighting, to a Lion among a herd of Neat. - - Play. Vol. 3.(K. John. Vol. i. Tempefi. Vol. 3. a lawful - ibid. Vol. 4. Vol. r. 'Richard z. ibid. 2 Hen. 6. Titus Andro. Vol. 3. i Hen. 4. Vol. ?.. Tit. Andro. Vol. 3. Vol. 4. r ibid. Vol. i. Vol. z - ibid r Hen. 4. 3 Hen. 6. Hen. 8. Com. of Er. As you like it. Winter Tale. Ad. Vol. 4. 13 Hen. 6. Scene. 6 3 6 3 2. 3 4 3 9 7 Person. Sal. Pro. Baling. K. Rich. Sus. Goth. Wor. Tit. K. Hen. War. Ant. Jaques. Pan. Rich.
A OF THE Several Editions of Sbak eear's Play mide sife of and compared in this Impreflon. IR. JVilliam Shakefpear's Co- medies, Histories and Trage- dies, publifh'd according to the Ori- ginal Copies. the first Edition in Folio, I62.3. SThe second Impression in Folio, of 163 z. I. A Midsummer Night's fDream, as it hath been sundry times pub- lickly aded by the Right Honoura- 'ble the Lord Chamberlain's Servants. ,Printed by James Roberts, -Quarto, *6oo (the 36th Year of the Author's Age.) II. A most pleasant and excellent conceited Comedy of Sir John Falflaffe, and the Merry Wives of Winadfor, with the swaggering Vain ofAncient 'Pfloland Corporal Nym. printed for Arthur Johnson, 1619, Quarto. III. The excellent History of the Merchant of Venice, with the ex- tream Cruelty of Shylock the Jew toward the said Merchant, in cut- VOL .VI. ting a just Ppund of his Flefl, and the obtaining of. Tortia by the choice .of three Caskets. Printed by J. Roberts, 1600, Quarto.. - _ Another Edition of the Tahne,. printed by, y7. ?. for Thbo. Heyes, in the fame Year (the 3dth of his Age.) IV. Apleafant conceited C6m&efy called Loves Labor loft, ,as it was presented before her Highness thjs last Chrifimas, newly correded and augmented, by, Wil/'am Sbakefrear. I.printed, at London by W. W. for Cutbert Burley, 1598. V. A pleasant conceited Hiflory called The Taming of a Shrew, as it hath been iundry times aded by 'the Right Honourable the Earl ,of RPembroke his Servanits. ,Printed at London by V. S. for VNich. Ling, 1607. There is scarce.... line ,of this the fam. iwith the present Play, yet the Plot and Scenary scarce dif- ser at all from it. I ihou'd think it not written by Shake/fear ; but So o o there
there are Tome Speeches (in oneor two Scenes only) the fame: And we have there the conclusion of the Play, which is manifestly want- ing in all the subsequent Editions, as well as the latter part of the lafit Ad, manifefitly better, and clear of that ,impertinent Pro- lixity which is in the common E- ditions. SVI. Mr. JICilliam Shake/pear his true Cronicle Hiltory of the Life and Death of King Lear and his three Daughters, with the unfortu- nate Life of Edgar Son and Heir to the Earl of Gloucester, and his sullen and assumed humour of Tom a Bedlam. As it was play'd before the King's Majesty at Whitehall upon St. Stepheis Night in Chrifnmas Ho- lydays. 'By His Majeftiy's Servants playing usually at the Globe on the Bdnk/ide. Printed for rath. Butter, x6o8. VII. The Tragedy of King Ri- chard the Second, as it hath been publickly ated by the Right Ho- nourable the Lord Chamberlain his Servants. By William Shake/tear. Printed by Valentine Simms for An- drew Wife, 1598. (the 34th Year of Shakejfear's Age.) The fame, with new Additions, of the Parliament Scene, and the deposing of King Richard. As it hath been lately ated by the King's Majeflry's Servants at the Globe. By W. Shake/pear. Printed by W. W. for Matthew Law, i608, and again 1615. VIII. The: History of Hentrjy :the 4th, with the Battle at Shreewsbury, between the King and Lord Henry Riercy, Sirnamed Henry. Hot spur of the North. With the humourous Conceits of Sir John La/itajfe. newly correded by WTilliam Shake- spear. Printed by P. S. for Andrew Wifte, 1599, Quarto. his 3 sth Year. 'The fame Printed in 1604. The fame Printed for Matthew Law, c. in ;6o8, Quarto. IX. The Second Part of Henry the 4th, containing to his Death and Coronation of Henry the 5th. With the Humours of Sir John Falft'affe and ifwaggering RiftoL As it hath been sundry times publickly ated by the Right Honourable the Lord Chamberlain his Servants. Written by William Shake/pear. Printedi by V S. for Andrew Wifr and William Afpey, I600oo, Quarto, (the 36th Year of his Age.) X. The Cronicle History of Henry the 5th, with his Battle fought at Agincourt in France. Together with Ancient Pif/iol. As it hath been sundry times played by the Right Honourable the Lord Chamberlain's Servants. Printed by Tho. Crede for Tho. Millington, 1600. Anlother Printed for T.P. i6c8, Quarto. These Editions are lhort in many Scenes, and Speeches, and want the Chorus's; which (with many other noble Improvements) were fmince added by the Author, not above 8 Years before his Death. This was -one
one of the lafl Plays he finifh'd, a .onfiderable time after Henry the 6th hadi been written and aAed. See the Epilogue of Henry yth. XI. Henry te 6th, sirs4 Printed un- der this Title. The whole Conten- tion. bhetween the two famous Hoi- fes, LancafJer and Tork: With the Tragical Ends of the good Duke Humphrey, Richard Duke of Tork, and King Henry the Sixth : divided into two parts, and newly correded and inlarged. Written by W. Shake- Jfear, Gent. Printed at London for T. P. (without a date) Quarto. This was the first Sketch only of the present second and third Parts of Henry the Sixth; which were since greatly inlarged, .and- the Poetry improved; the Scenary was much the fame as at present. Since Printed under the fame Title by W. W. for Tho. Millington, with the true Tragedy of Richard D. of Tork, and the Death of good King Henry the 6th, aded by the Earl of Pembroke his Servants. I600. XII. The Tragedy of King Ri- chard the 3d, containing his treache- rous Plots againit his Brother C/a-. rence, the pitiful Murther of his In- nocent Nephews, his Tyrannical Ufurpations; with the whole course of his detested Life, and moit de- served Death. As hath been lately aded by the Right Honourable the Lord Chamberlain his Servants. By WI. Shakefpear. Printed by Tho. Creedfor Andrew Wife, 1598, Quarto (the 34th Year of the Author's Age.) 'The "fame nwrily augmented Printed for ith fame PrinterifS i6zo. The:fame in 6i.iz. XIII. The most lamentable Tra- gedy of Titus .Andronicus, -As. it hati beeii aundry times play'd -by the Kingy/&K fYfRs Setvants. Prin i d for Edi.' !thiite, i6i. 'Itappeas from B. Johnfon's Induilion to Bar- thol. Fair, that this Play was of- z" Years standing, :i. the Year i6i, so that if it was Shakefear's, it mriu have been Writ. in the z5th Year , f his Age. , XIV. The famous Hiflory of Troilus and Creffeida, excellently ex- pressing the beginning of their Loves, witri the conceited wooing of !Pan- darus Prince of Lyc4a. Written by Will. ShakpeJear. Imprinted by G. Eld, for R. ,Bonian and H, IWalley, 1609, Quarto, with a Preface of the Publisher. (This was 8 Years before his Death.) The fame, as it was aded by the Kings Majefty's Servants at the Globe. Printed by the fame. XV. An excellent conceited Trage- dy of Romeo and Jnliet. As it hath been often with great Applause play'd publickly, by the Right Honourable the Lord of Hunfdon his Servants. London Printed by John VDanter, '$97, Quarto. The most excellent and lamenta- ble Tragedy of Romeo and Juliet, newly correAed, augmented, and amended. As it' hath been sundry times publickly aded by the Right Honourable
for Cutbe, its. Piw- ,namberlain " .,xed by Tho. Crede, . S Burby3 1?99, IQuarto. XVI. The Tragical -tiilory of Hamekt TPrineof Denmark, By:W7. Skkeifkeear. Newly impzinted and enlarg'd to aliofit, as mucH again as it was, according to the true and per- set Copy, Printed by J. R.. for Ng.:L. x6oj, Quarto. , . The Tragedy of Itamiet ritnce of Venmark, newly imprinted and enlarg'd according to te uhe tyui-d perfedt Copy latdly Printed. 'Printed by/W. . for J0oh Smethwich, i6u1. -'XVII. 'he Tragea y bs othetlo, theeM loo' of Venice. As it hath been divers tiiies 'aeed at the Globe, aind at the Blatk 'Fryars, 'by his Ma- jefy's Servants. Writen by i/iL Shekfear. Publi1hed'. b Tho. J'iake, Quarto, 1(so6ri 'a ter his Death, as appears by the Preface.) P IN T S. (.! .d .