H A M L E T, Prince of Denmark.  ACT I. SCENE I An open Place before the Palace. Enter Bernardo and Francisco, twosentinels.,BERNARDO. .. H 0 's there . l j siFran. Nay, anfwer.me: tandandun=-,fold your seif. er. Long live the King. Fran. Bernardo ? Ber. He. Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour. Ber. 'Tis now struck twelve, get thee to bed, nran- Fran. For this relief, much thanks: 'tis bitter cold,, And I am sick at heart.,Ber. Have you had quiet guard . Fran. Not a mouse stirring. Ber. Well, good-night;. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The rivals of my watch, bid them make haffe.,Enter Horatio and Marcellus. Fran. I think I hear them. Stand who's there : ior.. Friends to this ground,,4,Mar..
Mar. And liege-men to the Dane. Iran. Give you good-night. .Mar. Oh farewel, honest soldier; who hath reliev'd,you? Fran. BErnarde has my place: give you good-night.,[Exit Francisco. Mar. Holla, Bernardo. Btr. Say, what is Horatio there ? Her. A piece of him. BEr. Welcome Heratio, welcome good Marcellus. Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night.' Ber. I have seen nothing. Mar. Horatio savs, 'tis gut our phantafie, And will not let belief take hold of him, Touching this dreaded fight, 'twice seen of us; Therefore I have intreated him along With us, to watch the minutes of this night, That if again this apparition come, He may approve our eyes, and speak to it.,Her. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear. Ber. Sit down a while, And let us once again aflail your ears, That are so fortified against our flory, What we have two nights seen.,Her. Well, fit we down, And let us hear Sernardo speak of this.,Ber. Last night of all, When yon fame far, that's wefiward from the pole, Had made his course t'illume that part of heav'n Where now it burns, Marcell.s and my self, The bell then beating one-,Mar. Peace, break thee off3,Enter the Ghofi. Look where it comes again.,Ber. In the fame fioure, like the King that's dead. Mar. Thou art a scholar, speak to it, Horatio. ctr. Looks it not like the King ?mark it, Horatio. Hor. Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder. Br. It would be spoke to.
Mar. Speak to it, Horatio. Her. What art thou that ufurp'ft this time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form, In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometime march ? by Heav'n I charge thee speak:,Mar. It is offended. Ber. See ! it stalks away. oHr. Stay5 speak I charge thee, speak. [Ex. Ghofl. Mar. 'Tis gone, and will not answer. Ber. How now, Horatio? you tremble and look pale. Is not this something more than phantafie What think you of it Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe, Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes.,Mar. Is it not like the King Hor. As thou art to thy self. Such was the very armour he had on, When he th'ambitious Norway combated: So frown'd he once, when in an angry parle, He smote the fleaded a Polafk on the ice. 'Tis itrange -,Mtr. Thus twice before, and just at this b dead houri, With martial stalk, hath he gone by our watch.,Hor. In what particular thought to work, I know not : But in the gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some frange eruption to our state.,Mar. Good now fit down, and tell me, he that knows,, Why this fame ftrit and moft-obfervant watch So nightly toils the subje&s of the land ? And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war Why such impress of shipwrights, whose fore task Does not diviae the funday from the week . What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint labourer with the day:-,Who a Pole-axe in the common editions he speaks of an prince of Poland whom he flew in battle. He ufjs the word Polack again, as. z, fcne 4. b famt.
Who is't that can inform me ?,Hor. That can I, At least the whisper goes so. Our last King, Whose image even but now appear'd to us. Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, (Thereto prickt on by a most emulate pride) Dar'd to the fiht. In which, our valiant hamlet, (For so this fide of our known world efteem'd him) Did flay this Fortinbras: who by seal'd compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit (with his life) all those his lands Which he stood seiz'd of to the Conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our King; which had return To the inheritance of Fcrinbras, Had he been vanquifhsr, as by that cov'nant And carriage of the articles defign'd, His fell to Hamlet. Now youn_ Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and fuil, Hath in the skirts of Noriway, here and there, Shark'd up a lift of landless resolutes, For food and dyet, to some enterprize That hath a stomach in't: which is no other, And it doth well appear unto our slate, But to recover of us by strong hand And terms compulfative, those foresaid lands So by his father loft: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of this pob-hafte and romage in the land.,Eer. I tl:ink it be no other, but even so: Well may it fort that this portentous figure Comes armed through our watch so like the King, That was and is the question of these wars.,Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye. In the most high and t palmy state of Rome, A little ere thermightieft Yulius fell, The graves stood tenantless, the Iheeted dead,Did' f palmy for vicorious; in the other editions flou- rishing.
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman fireets, Stars fhon with trains of fire, dews of blood fell, Disasters veil'd the fun, and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune's empire sands, Was sick almost to doom's-day with eclipse. And even the like precurfe of fierce events, As harbingers preceding fiill the fates, And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heav'n and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and country-men.,Enter Ghofl again. But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again! I'll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!,[Spreading his arms: If thou haft any found, or use of voice, Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do ease, and grace to me; Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy country's fate, Which happily foreknowing may avoid, Oh speak! ---. Or, if thou hait uphoorded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, [Cock crows. For which, they fay, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay, and speak - Stop it, Marcellus--,Mar. Shall I strike at it with my partizan . Hor. Do, if it will not land. Ber. 'Tis here Hor. 'Tis here- Mer. 'Tis gone. [Exit Gbof, We do it wrong, being To majestical, To offer it the hlew of violence; For it is as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows, malicious mockery.,Eer. It was about to speak, when the cock crew. Hor. And then it flarted like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard, The cock that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and Ihrill-founding throat Awake the God of day; and at his warning, Whether in tea or fire, in earth or air, Th' extravagant and erring spirit hyes To his conine. And of the truth herein, This present object made probation.,Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some fay, that ever 'gainft that season comes Wherein- our Saviour's birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning fingeth all night long: And then, they fay, no spirit walks abroad, The nights are wholfome, then no pTanets strike, BNo Fairy takes, no witch hath power to charm; So hallowed and so gracious is the time.,Her. So have I heard, and do in part believe it, But look, the morn in ruffet mantle clad, Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill; Break we our watch up, and biv my advice Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young Hamlet. For upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him: Do you content we Ihall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty l,Mar. Let's do't, I pray, and I this morning know Where we {hall find him most conveniently. [Exeunt.,SCEN E II.,The Palace. Enser Claudius King of Denmark, Gertrude tihe ; qen;,Hamler, Polonius, Laertes, Voltimand, Corne-,lius, lords and attendants. King. rT Hough yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death,J The memory be green; and that it fitted To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom To be contrated in one brow of woe; Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature, T,That
That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of our selves. Therefore our sometime sifter, now our Queen, Th' imperial jointress of this warlike Itate, Have we, as 'twere, with a defeated joy, With one auspicious, and one dropping eye, With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole, Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barr'd Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along, (for all, our thanks.) Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth; Or thinking by our late dear brother's death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame; Colleaoued with this dream of his advantage; He hal fail'd not to pester us with meflage, Importing the surrender of those lands Loft by his father, by all bands of law To our moflt valiant brother. So much for him. Now for our self, and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is. We have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fsrtinbras, Who impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress His further gate herein; in that the levies, The lifts, and full proportions are all made Out of his fubjefs: And we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norutay; Giving to you no further personal power Of treaty with the King, more than the scope Which there dilated articles allow. Farewel, and let your haste commend your duty.,Vol. In that, and all things, will we ihew our duty. King. We doubt it nothing, heartily farewel.,[Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius. And now Laertes, what's the news with you > You told us of some suit. What is't, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,
And lose your voice. What would't thou beg Laertcs That fhail not be my offer, not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more initrumental to the mouth, Than is the Throne of Denmark to thy father. What wouldit thou have, Laertes?,Lacr. My dread lord, Your leave and favour to return to France; From whence, though willingly I came to Denmark To shew my duty in your coronation; Yet now I must confeis, that duty done, My thoughts and wishes bend again tow'rd France: And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.,.iCng. Have you your father's leave ? what fays Po-,lnrius ? Pol. He hath, my lord, by labourfome petition, Wrung from me my flow leave; and at the lafl Upon his will I seal'd my hard content. I do beseech you give him leave to go.,King. Take thy tair hour, Laertes, time be thine, And thy best graces; spend it at thy will. But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my Con -,Ham. A !ittle more than kin, and less than kind. King. How is it that the clouds fill hang on you? Ham. Not so my lord, I am too much i'th' fun. (Oeen. Good Hamlet cast thy a nighted colour off, And let thine eve look like a friend on Denmark. Do not, for ever, with thy veiled lids, Seek for thv noble father in the dust; Thou knon-'ft 'tis common, all that live must die, Pafling through nature to eternity.,Ham. Av, madam, it is common. OQ.een. If it be; Why seems it so particular with thee?,Ham. Seems, madam ? nay, it is I know notfeems: 'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor cuCromarv flits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,,Nor a 'i^;:lt .
Nor the deje&ed 'haviout of 'the visage, Together with all forms, moods, fheis of grief, That can denote me truly. These may seem, For they are a&tions that a man might play; But I have that within, which paffetlh how: These, but the trappings, and the suits of woe.,King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, To give tlefe mourning duties to your father: But you must know, your father loft a father, That father his, and the surviver bound In filial obligation, for some term To do obsequious sorrow. But to persevere In obstinate condolement, is a course Of impious stubbornness, unmanly grief. Jr Ihews a will most incorrec to heav'n, A heart unfortify'd, a mind impatient, An understanding simple, and unfchool'd For what we know mull be, and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we, in our peevifli 6ppofition, Take it to heart . fie! 'tis a fault.to heav'n, A fault against the dead, a fault t. nature, To reason most absurd, whose common theam Is death of fathers, and who still hath cry'd, From the first coarse, 'till he that died to-day, " This must be so." We pray you throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne, And with no less nobility of love, Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart tow'rd you. For your intent In going back to school to Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire: And we beseech you, bend you to remain Here in the cheer and comfort of our eve, Our chiefeft courtier, cousin, and our son.,_ueen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Htnlt: I pr'ythee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg. Han, I Ihall in all my belt obey you, madam.,King.
King. Why 'tis a loving and a fair reply, Be as our self in Denmark. Madam, come, This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell; And the King's rowfe the heav'n {hall bruit again Re-fpeaking earthly thunder. Come away. [Exeunt.,SCENE III.,Manet Hamlet. Ham. Oh that this too-too solid flelh would melt, Thaw, and resolve it felfinto a dew; Or that the Everlasting had not fixt His a canon 'gainit felf-flaughter. Oh God! ohGod! How weary, sale, flat, and unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world ? Fie on't! oh fie! 'tis an unweeded garden That arows to feed; things rank, and gross il nature Possess it, meerly that it [hould come thus. But two months dead ! nay, not so much; not two,- So excellent a King, that was, to this, Hyierion to a satyr: so loving to my mother, That he permitted not the winds of heav'n Visit her face too roughly. Heav'n and earth ! Must I remember? - wlh, she would hang on him, As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on; yet within a month - Let me not think- Frailty, thy name is woman ! A little month! - or e'er tho'e shooes were old With which she follow'd my poor father's body, Like -'iobe, all tears - Why Ihe, ev'n she,- Oh heav'n ' a beast that wants discourse of reafoft Would have mourn'd longer- married with mine unle, My father's brother; io more like my father, Than I to Hercules. Within a month! Ere vet the salt of most unrighteous tears, Had left the flushing in her gauled eyes,,She · .ncd,
She married. Oh most wicked speed, to polt With such dexterity to incestuous sheets: It is not, nor it cannot come to good. But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.,SCENE IV. Enter Horatio, Bernardo, and Marcellus. Hor. Hail to your lordship. Ham. I am glad to fee you well, Horatio? or I do forget my self?,Hor. The fame, my lord, and your poor servant ever. Ham. Sir, my good friend, I'll change that name,with you: And what make you from Tittenerg, Horatio ? Marcellius ! - Mar. My good lord- Ham. I am very glad to fee you; good even, Sir. But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?,Her. A truant disposition, good my lord. Ham. I would not c hear your enemy fay so; Nor shall you do mine ear that violence, To make it trufler of.your own report Againit your fel. I know you are no truant; But what is your affair in Elfinoor? We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart. Hor, My lord, I came to fee your father's funeral. Ham. I pr'ythee do not mock me, fellow-fludenti I think it was to fee my mother's wedding.,Hor. Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon. Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio: the funeral bak'd meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heav'n, Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio. My father -- methinks I fee my father.,oHr. Oh where, my lord . Ham, In my mind's eye, Horatio. Hor. I saw him once, he was a goodly King. Ham, He was a man, take him for all in all, VoL. VIII. K I i'all,c have.
I shall not look upon his like again.,Her. My lord, I think I saw him yefternight. Ham. Saw ! who - Hor. My lord, the King your father. arm. The King my father! H;r. Season your admiration for a while Wiih an attentive ear 'till I deliver Upon tie witness of these gentlemen, Ti:is marvel to you,,H.ur. For heaven's love, let me hear. .Hr. Two nilgts together had these gentlemen, M.arcei:is and Efrrar.!s, on their watch, In the dead waste and middle of the night, Been thus encounnred. A figure like your father, Arm'd at all points exactly, Cat-a-Je, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes flow and ilately by them; thrice he walk'd, By their oppreft and fear-furprized eyes, W'ithin his truncheon's length whilit they (diftill'd Almost to jellv with the a& of fear) Stand dumb, and speak not to him. This to me in dreadful fecrecv impart they did, And I with them'the third night kept the watch, Where as they had deliver'd both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The apparition comes. I knew your father: These hands are not more like.,Ham. But where was this ! .Mar. Mv lord, upon the platform where we watcht. H-am. Did you not speak to it' Hcr. My lord, I did; But answer made it none; yet once methought I: lifted up its head, and did address It self to motion, like as it would speak: But even then the morning cock crew loud; And at the found it Ifrunk in halfe away, And vaniffit from our fight.,_Ham. 'Tis very ftranae. Hrr. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true And ye did think it writ down in our duty,To
±19 To let you know of it. Ham. Indeed, Sirs, but this troubles me. Hold you the watch to-night) Both. We do,- my lord. Ham. Arm'd, fay you? Both. Arm'd, my lord. Ham. From top to toe ? Both. My lord, from head to foot. Ham. Then saw you not his face ? Hor. Oh yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up. Ham. What, look'd he frowningly ? Hor. A count'nance more in sorrow than in anger. Ham. Pale, or red ? Hor. Nay, very pale. Ham. And fixt his eyes upon you Hor. Most contantly. Ham. I would I had been there. Hor. It would have much amaz'd you. arm. Very like staid it long ? Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a,hundred. A11. Longer, longer. ior. Not when I faw't. Hm,. His beard was grisly Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life, A fable filver'd. Iam. I'll watch to-night; perchance 'twill walk again. 'or. I warrant you it will, Hlam. If it ainume my noble father's person, I'll speak to it, tho' hell it self Ihould gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If you have hitherto conccal'd this fight; Let it be d treble in your silence still: And whatsoever flall befall to-night, Give it an understanding, but no tongue; I will requite your loves: so, fare ye well. Upon the platform 'twixt eleven and twelve 1'11 visit you. Ali. Our duty to your honour. [Exeunt.,K . .Ham. ' i nable,
Ham. Your love, as mine to you: farewel. Mv father's spirit in arms ! all is not well; 1 doubt some foul play: would the night were come; 'Till then fit still, my' foul: foul deeds will rife, (Tho' all the earth o'erwhelm them) to mens eyes.,[ Exit. SCENE V. An Apartment in Polonius's Louse.,Enter Laertes and Ophelia. Laer. i{fY necessaries are imbark'd, farewel;,IVI And sifter, as the winds give benefit, And convoy is afliftant; do not sleep, But let me hear from you.,oPh. Do you doubt that? Laer. For iHai.ket, and the trifling of his favours; Hold ir a falhion and a toy in blood, A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not permanent, tho' sweet, not latfing, E The perfume, and suppliance of a minute; No more.,Gch. No more but of ? Laer. Think it no more: Tor nature crescent does not grow alone, In if thews and bulk; but as his temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and foul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no f foil nor cautel doth befmerch The virtue of his g will: but you must fear, His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own: For he himself is subject to his birth ; He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himfelfi for on his choice depends The h fanaity and health of the whole state.,And ce lhe fltpliance of a minute. t thews, or qualitie. f foii. g fear. h or, sanity.
L2X1- And therefore must his choice be circumfcrib'l Unto the voice and yielding-of that body Whereof he's head. Then if he fays he loves vou, It fits your wifddm so fair to believe it, As- he in his peculiar i a& and place May give his faying deed; which is no further, Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honour may fuftait, If with too credent ear' you lift his songs, Or lose your heart; or your chaste treasure open To his unmafter'd importunity. Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sifter, And keep within the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The charieft maid is prodigal enough, If The unmask her beauty to the moon: Virtue it self scapes not calumnious firokes, The canker galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be difclos'd; And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary then, best safety lies in fear; Youth to it self rebels, though-,none else near. oph. I Ihall th' effe&s of this good lesson keeps As watchman to my heart. But good my brother, Do not, as Come ungracious pastors do, Shew me the steep and thorny way to heav'n; Whilit like a puft and careless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, j And recks not his own reed. Laer. Oh, fear me not i fej and force. t recks not his own reed, that is, heeds not hi own leflons.,K1,SC.tNS
SCENE VI.,Enter Polonius. i tav too long - but here my father comes: A double blefling is a double grace; Occalion smiles upon a second leave.,PYl. Yet here, Laertes! get aboard for shame, The vind fits in the fnoulder of your fail, And you are staid for there. My blefling with you; And these few precepts in thy memory Sze thou charater. ' Give thy thoughts no tongue, ' Nor any u nproportion'd thought his a&: ' Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar; ' Tle friends thou haft, and their adoption try'd, Grapple them to thy foul with hooks of fleel: ' But do not dull thy palm with cntertainment ' Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware ' Of Entrance to a quarrel: but being in, · Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee. ' Give ev'rv man tiine ear3 but few thy voice. · Take each man's censure; but reserve thy judgment. Coftlv thv habit as thy purse can buy, But not expref in fancy; rich, not Saudy: For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And thiev in Fra;;ce of the bell rank and flatjon Are moil fele&t and generous, chief in that. Neither a borrower, nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both it self and friend: A borrowina dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all; to thine own self be true; And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. Farewel my blessing season this in thee !,Laer. Molt humblv do I take my leave, my lord. Prl. The time invites vou, go, your servants tend. Lnar. Farewel Opheia, and remember well W\Vha I have said.,OPh. 'Tis in myv mem'rv lockt, And you your seif niall keep the key of it.,ficr.
Laer. Farewel. [Exit Laer. Pol. What is't, Ophelia, he said to you ? oph. So please you, something touching the lord,Hamlet. Pol. Marry, well bethought! 'Tis told me he hath very oft of late Given private time to you; and you your self Have of your audience been most free and bounteou?, If it be so, as so 'tis put on me, And that in way of caution, I must tell you, You do not understand your self so clearly, As it behoves my daughter, and your honour. What is between you? give me up the truth.,Oph. He hath, my lord, of late, made many tenders Of his affetion to me.,Pol. Affection! puh' you speak like a green girl, Unfifted in such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call them ?,oph.. I do not know, my lord, what I should thil:,. Pol. Marry I'll teach you; think your self a baby, That you have ta'en his tenders for true pay, Which are nct sterling. Tender your self more dearl; Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,) Wronging it thus, you'll tender me a fool. oph. hMy lord, he hath importun'd me with love, In honourable fashion. Pol. Ay, farhion you may call't: go to, go to. oph. And hath giv'n count'nance to his fpeecll, my,lord, With almost all the holy vows of heaven.,Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know When the blood urns, how prodigal the foul Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, oh my daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both, Ev'n in their promise as it is a making, You must not take for fire. From this time, Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence, Set your intreatments at a highter rate, Than a command to parley. For lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young;,K ¢ And
And with a larger t tether may he walk, Than may be given vou. In few, ophclia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, k Not of that die which their investments shew, But meer implorers of unholy suits, Brearting like fanfcified and pious l Bawds, The better to beguile. This is for all . I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have vou so ifander any moment's leisure, As to give words or talk with the lord Hamlet. Look to':, I charge vou; come your way.,Oph. I lhall obey, my lord. [Exe:nt;,SCENE VII. Ti'e Platform before the Palace. Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus. Ham. T HE Air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.,I Hor. It-is a nipping and an eager air. Ham. What hour now ? Hor. I think it lacks of twelve. .!ar. No, it is struck. Eor. I heard it not: it then draws near the season \S herein the spirit held his wont to walk.,[Xoife of warlike mufick within. What does this mean, my lord ?,aI:n. The King doth wake to-night, and takes his,row rfe, Keeps wafGel, and the fvagg'ring upstart reels; And as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.,/or. Is it a custom ',Ham, t Tider, or tether, teder, a firing to tye horses. k 'Ct or the e,;e which their invej-ments JIezw. Bonds in all thc editions.
Ham. Ay marry is't But to my mind, though I-am native here And to-the manner born, it is a custom More honour'd in the breach, than the observance, -*,Enter Ghost. Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!. Ham. Angels and-minifters of grace defend us!' Be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damn'd, Bring with thee airs from heav'n, or blasts from.hell, Be thy m intents wicked or charitable, Thou com'f in such a questionable shape, That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet, King, Father, Royal Dane: oh!. answer me,,' TheJf zl lines following are in the firfl edition, but ai fcme editions. fnce left out, perhaps as being. thoughr too verbose, but certainly Slhakefpear's. This heavy-headed revell, east and- weft, Makes us traduc'd, and tax'd of other nations, They clepe us drunkards, and wi$ fwiniih phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our atchievements, though perform'd at.height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So ott it chances in particular men, That-for some vicious mole of nature in them,. As. in their birth (wherein they are not.guilty, Since nature cannot chufe his origin) lly the o'crgrowth of some conmplexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason Or by some habit, that too much-o'er-leavens The form of plausive manners that these men Carrying, I fay, the flamp of one defect, (Being nature's livery, or fortune's scar) Their virtues else, be they as pure as grace, As ininite as man may undergo, Shall in the general censure .take corruption From that particular fault.---,Enter GhQJt, . m e&ents.
Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canoniz'd bones hearsed in death, Have burfi their cearments ? why the sepulcher, "Wherein we saw thee quietly in-urn'd, Hath ope'd his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again ? What may this mean That thou dead coarse again in compleat steel Revifit'ft thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous and us fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our fouls ? Say, why is this wherefore what should we do?,[Ghofl beckons Hamlet. Her. It beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment did desire To you alone.,Mi.ar. Look with what courteous a&ion It waves you to a more removed ground: 3ut do not go with it. Hor. No, by no means. [holding Hamlet, amn. It will not speak; then I will follow it. Hor. Do not, my lord. Ham. Why, what should be the fear ? I do not set my life at a pin's fee And for my foul, what can it do to that? Being a thing immortal as it fel. It waves me forth again. - I'll follow it,Hor. What if it tempt you tow'rd the flood, my,lord ? Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff, That beetles o'er his base into the sea; And there aflume some other horrible form, Which might deprive your fov'reignty of reafonr, And draw you into madness think of it. ' The very place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into ev'ry brain, That looks so many fadoms to the sea; And hears it roar beneath.,HAm. · The 4fclioi lines added from the firfl edition..
Ham. It waves me fill: go on, I'll follow thee Mar. You shall not go, my lord. Ham. Hold off your hand. Hor. Be rul'd, you shall not go. Ham. My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemeaan lion's nerve: Still am I call'd) unhand me, gentlemen,Breaking from them; By heav'n I'll make a ghost of him that lets me-- I fay away - go on-- I'll follow thee,[Exe. Ghofi and Hamlet. Hor. He waxes defp'rate with imagination. Maar. Let's follow5 'tis not fit thus to obey him. .Hor. Have after. To what iflue will this come ? Mar. Something is rotten in the fate of Denmark. Hor. Heav'n will direc if. Maar. Nay, let's follow him. [Exeunt.,SCENE VIII. Re-enter Ghofi and Hamlet. Halm. Where wilt thou lead me ? speak I'll go no Ghoff, Mark me. [further. Ham. I will. GhoJf. My hour is almost come, When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames Must render up my self.,Ham. Alas poor Ghost! Ghofl. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I fiall unfold.,Ham. Speak, I am bound to hear. Ghofi. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear. Ham. What Ghofl. I am thy Father's spirit; Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day, confin'd to fast in fires; 'Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purg'd away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prifon-houle,,I. could
I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word Would harrow up thy foul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes like stars itart from their spheres, Thy knotty and combined locks to part, And each particular hair to itand on end Like quills upon the fretful porcupine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood; lift, lift, oh lit ! If thou didft ever thy dear father love -,Ham. Oh heav'n ! Ghofl. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther; Ham. Murther ' Ghost. Murther molt foul, as in the best it is; But this most foul, firange, and unnatural.,Ham. Halte me to know, what I with wings as swift As meditation or the thoughts of love, May sweep to my revenge.,Ghojf. 1 find thee apt; And duller Ihouldft thou be than the fat weed That rots it self in ease on LIthe's wharf, Wouldftthou not fir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear 'Tis given out, that sleeping in my orchard, A serpent suing me. The whole ear of Denmark Is bv a forged process of mv death Rankly abus'd: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did fting thy father's life Now wears his crown.,ra;m. Oh my prophetick foul! my uncle G;hSf,. Ay, that incefthous, that adulterate beaff, W\i:h Witchcraft of his wit, with trait'rous gifts, (Oh. wicked wit, and gifts that have the power So to seduce!) won to his shameful lust The wiil of my most seeming virtuous Queen. Oil Hamlet, -hat a falling o-f was there ! From me, whose love was of that dignity, That it went hand in hand ev'n with the vow. I made to her in marriage; and to decline UIpon a wretch, whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine ! Lut virtue, as it neyer will be mov'd,,Thougi.
Thouah lewdness court it in a thape of heav'n; So lun, though to a radiant angel link'd, Will fate it self in a celeitial bed, And prey on garbage----- But soft, methinks I scent the morning air- Brief let me be; Sleeping within mine orchard,. My custom always in the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle hole With juice of cursed hebenon in a viol,. And in the porches of mine ears did pour The leperous diffilment.; whose effeft Holds such an enmity with blood of man, That swift as quick-silver it courses through The nat'ral gates and allies of the body; And with. a sudden vigour it.doth posset And curd; like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholfome blood: so did it mine, And a most instant tetter a bark'd about, Most lazar-like, with yile and loathsome cruft All my finooth body. Thus was I sleeping, by a brother's hand, Of life, of crown, of Queen at once difpatcht Cut off even in the blossoms of.my fin,. f Unhouzzled, t unanointed, t unanel'd No reck'ning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head. Oh horrible ! oh horrible !' most horrible ! If thou haft nature in thee, bear it not; Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damned incef. But howsoever thou purfu'ft this aft, Taint not thy mind, nor.let thy foul contrive Againit thy mother ought; leave her to heav'n, And to those thorns-that in her bosom lodge, To prick and fling her. Fare thee well at once! The glow-worm Ihews the matin to be near,,' unhouzzled, without tle sacrament being takenj *· unanointed, without extream . nEfioin. t unanel'd, no knell raig, a bak'd,,Anc
And 'gins to pale his uneffeftual fire. Adieu, adieu, adieu; remember me. [Exit.,Ham. Oh all you holt of heav'in! oh earth ! what else . And shall I couple hell ? oh hold my heart And you my sinews, grow not instant old; But bear me fliffly up; remember thee - Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a feat In this diflraeted globe: remember thee Yea, from the table of my memory I'll wive away all trivial fond records, All saWs of books, all forms, all preflures palt, That youth and observation copied there ; And thv commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Inmixt with baser matter. Yes, by heav'n: Oh molf pernicious woman ! Oh villain, villain, smiling damned villain!,tables,--- meet it is I set it down, That one may finile, and smile, and be a villain At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark. [Writi;n, So uncle, there you are ; now to my word s It is: Adieu, adieu, rememberme: I've sworn it,SCEN E IX. Enter Horatio and Marcellus, .or. My lord, my lord. Mar. Lord Hamlet. Hcr. Heav'n secure him. M'ar. So be it. Hor. Illo, ho, ho, my lord. 1iam. Hillo, ho, ho, boy; come boy, come, ,sMar. How is't, my noble lord: Hir. What news, my lord ? H1-am. Oh wonderful! e'or. Good my lord, tell it. F.am. No, you'll reveal it. kcr. Not I, my lord, by heav'n, IAar.. Nor I, my lord,.,ta.r,
Ham. How fay you then, would heart of man once-,think it But you'll be secret ? --,Both. Ay, by heav'n, my lord. Ham. There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark, But he is an arrant knave.,Hor. There needs no ghof, my lord, come from,the grave To tell us this.,Ham. Why right, you are i'th' right; And so without more circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we Ihake hands, and part; You as your business and desires shall point you, (For every man has business and desire, Such as it is) and for my own poor part, I will go pray. Hor. These are but wild and hurling words, my lord. Ham. I'm sorry they offend you, heartily; Yes heartily. Hor, There's no offence, my lord. Ham. Yes, by St. Patrick, but there is, my lord,. And much offence too. Touching this vision here - It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O'er-mafter't as you may.. And now, good friends,. As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,. Give me one poor request.,Hor. What is't, my lord ? Ham.Never make known what you have seen to-night;. Both. My lord, we will not. Ham. Nay, but fwear't. Hor. In faith, my lord, not T. Alar. Nor T, my lord, in faith. Ham. Upon my sword. Mar. We've fsorn, my lord, already: Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed, Ghof., Swear. [ Ghoif cries under the jfage~ Ham. Ah ha boy, fay'ft thou so; art thou there,,truepenny ? Come on,. you. hear this fellow in the celleridge.,Consent
Consent to swear. Hor. Propose the oath, my lord. Ham. Never speak of this that you. have seen, Swear by my sword.,Ghost. Swear. Ham. Hic e7 ubique ? then we'll shift our grund. Come hither gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword. Never to speak of this which you have heard,. Swear by my sword.,Ghof. Swear. htam. Well said, old mole, can'st work i'th'ground,so fast 1 A worthy pioneer ! Once more remove, good friends.,Hor. Oh day and night! but this is wondrous strange.,ran:. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more things in heav'n and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come, Swear as before, never so help you mercy, How strange or odd foe'er I bear my self, ( As I perchance hereafter flall think meet To put an antick disposition on) That you at such time feeing me, never shall With arms encumbred thus, or this head Ihake, OI by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As, well - we know- or, we.could, and it we,would Or, if we lift to speak - or, there be, and it. there,miaht (1Or fih ambiguous giving out) denote That you know ought of me. This do ye swear, So grace and mercy at your most need help you! Swear.,Ghkol. Swear. HRm. Reft,. ref, perturbed spirit. So, gentlemen, With all my love I do commend me to you And what so poor a man as hiamlet is, M-ay do t' express his love and friendin to you, God wviling, hall nut lack; let us go in togeter-, And fiill youz fingers. on your lips 1 pray,
The time is out of joint; oh cursed fpight, That ever I was born to set it right. Nay, come, let's go together. [Exeunt,,AC T II. SCENE I. An Apartment in Polonius'sboufe.,Enter Polonius, and Reynoldo.,P o L o N I u s. S Kt~.(~ ^ IVE him this mony, and these notes,,a B? -,," * Rcynoldo. '{ G . Rey. I will, my lord.,Pol. You shall do marvellous wifely,,good Reynoldo, Lam1^-^ Before you visit him, to make inquiry,Of his behaviour. Rey. My lord, I did intend it. Pol. Marry,well said very well said. Look you, Sir, Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris; And how, and who, what means, and where they keep, What company, at what expence ; and finding By this encompassment and drift of question, That they do know my son; come you more near; Then your particular demands will touch it, Take you, as 'twere Tome distant knowledge of him, As thus- I know his father and his friends, And in part him -- Do you mark this, Reynoldo ?,Rey. Av, very well, my lord. Pol. And in part him - but you may fay - not well; But if't be he I mean, he's very wild; Addited so and so - and there put on him What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank, As may dilhonour him; take heed of that;
But, Sir, such wanton, wild, and usual flips, As are companions noted and moll known To youth and liberty.,Rey. As gaming, my lord . Poi. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, Quarrelling, drabbing - You may go so far.,Re'. My lord, tha: would dishonour him. Pol. Faith no, as you may season it.in the charge; You must not put another scandal on him, That he is open to incontinency, Tha:'s not my meaning; but breathe his faults fe,quaintly, That they may teem the taints of liberty The flafn and'out-break of a fiery mind, A favaaenefs in unreclaimed blood- Of general aflault. . Rev. But, my good lord- PGI. Wherefore should you do this ? Rey. A', my lord, I would know that. . PoI arry, Sir, here's my drift, And I believe it is a fetch of rwit. You laying there flight sallies on my son, As 'twere a thing a little foil'd i'th' working, Mark you your party in converse; he you would found, Havina ever seen in the prenominate crimes, The youth you speak of guilvt, be affur'd He closes with, you in this consequence; Good Sir, or so, or friend, or gentleman, (Accordins to the phrase or the addition, Of man and country. ),Rev. Very good, mv lord, Pei. And then, Sir, does he this He do's - what was I about to sav ? I was about to fay a something': \vhere did I leave,Rev. At closes in the confequlence. Poi. A: closes in the consequence-- Ay marry, He closes thus. I know the gentleman, 1 saw him veftrerday, or t'other day, Or then, with such and such, and as you fay,,There * 7.'h3:g.
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in's rowfe, There falling out at tennis; or perchance, I saw him enter such a house of file, Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth - See you now; Your bait of fallhood takes this carp of truth; And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlaces, and with assays of-byas, By indirections find directions out: So by my former lecture and advice Shall you my son ; you have me, have you not .,Rey. My lord, I have. Pol. God b'w' you; fare you well. Rey. Good my lord Pol. Observe his inclination in your self. Rey. I Ihall, my lord. Pol. And let him ply his mufick. Rey. Well, my lord. [Exit,,S C E N E II.,Enter Ophelia. Pol. Farewel. How now ophelia, what's the matteri' oph. Alas my lord, I have been so affrighted! Pol. With what, in the name of heav'n ? Oph. My lord, as I was towing in my closet, Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd, No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd, Ungarter'd, and down-gyved to his ancle, Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other, And with a look. so piteous in purport, As if he had been looted out of hell, To speak of horrors; thus he comes before me.,Pol. Mad for thy love - Oph. My lord, I do not know: But truly I do fear it.,Pol. What said he oph. He took me by the wri(t, and held me hard, Then goes he to the length of all his arm And with his other hand, thus o'er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face,,As
As he would draw it. Long time staid he so; At 'aft, a little shaking of his arm, And thrice his head thus waving up and down, HIe ris'd a igh,- so piteous and profound,. That it did seem to thatter all his bulk, And end his being. Then he lets me go,- And with his head over his Ihoulder turn'd, He feem'd to find his way without his eyes, For out-a-doors he went without their help, And to the last, bended their light on me.,Pcl. Come, go with me, I will go seek the King, This is the very ecftafie of love, Whose violent property foredoes it self, And leads the will to defp'rate undertakings, As oft as any paflion under heav'n, That do's afflid our natures. I am sorry; ,What, have you giv'n him any hard words of late?,osh. No, my good lood; but as you did command, I did repel his letters, and deny'd His access to me.,Pol. That hath made him mad. I'm sorry that with better heed and judgment I had not quoted him. I sear'd he trisl'd And meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealoufie It seems it is as proper to our age, To cast beyond our selves in our opinions, As it is common for the younger fort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the Kinr. This must be known, which being kept close, might,move More grief to hide, than hate to utter love. [Exer:nt.,Cee d. $CEN.E
S C E N E III.,The Palace. Enter King, .een, .Rofincroffe, Guildenflern, lord;,and other attendants. King. E ELCOME dear Rofncrof and GNilden-,flern, Moreover, that we much did long to fee you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty fending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet's transformation; so I call it, Since not th' exterior, nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be SMore than his father's death, that thus hath put him So much from th' understanding of himself, I cannot dream of. I entreat you both, That being of so young days brought up with him, AnJ since To neighbour'd to his youth and humour, That you vouchsafe your reft here in our court Some little time, so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather So much as from occasions vou may glean, If ought, to us unknown, aflits him thus, That open'd lies within our remedy.,pieen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you; And sure I am, two men there are not living, To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To Ihew us so much gentry and good will, As to extend your time with us a while, for the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation Ihall receive such thanks As fits a King's remembrance.,RoJ. Both your Majesties Might by the sovereign power you have of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.,Guil, But we both obey,,And
And here give up our selves in the full bent, To lay our service freely at your feet.,Kin;c. Ti.anks, Roi7;croffe and gentle Guildenfiern. :!ee;.. Thanks, CGildenfirrn and gentle RoJincroffe; And I beseech ou infantly to visit -My toc-mui U -.C.a- ld lon. Go some of ye, And 'cir. t'f ' :e-.t:-i-:cn where Hamlet is. CGii. H ' :-'.- ;na<t our presence and our pracices Pleafan: , . ; ... ii: ihim ! [ Exeunt Rot. and Guil.,F;;tr. Polonius. n. b n-' uEft.dors from Xortay, mny good lord, L-: -~ :Iv return'i.,5:.:. Th' tr tli'1 lafl been the father of good news. i.-i. Have I, mv lord' aflure you, my good liege, .:old nmr cutv, as T hold my foul, So:' to my God, and to my gracious King; And I do h ink ( or else this brain of mine Hunts not ti-e rrail of po'.cv, so sure As I have us'd tr do )that I have found The vecrx cause of ?amietr's lunacy.,-i.-. 01; speak of that, that I do long to hear. Poi. Give first admittance to th' ambafadors. My new.s f.all be the fruit to that great feast.,:ig,. Thl self do grace to them, and bring them,in. [Ex. Pol. He tells me, my sweet Queen, that he hath found The head and fcource of all your son's distemper.,ct:!een. I doubt it is no other but the main, His father's death, and our o'er-hafty marriage.,SCENE IV. Enter Polonius, Voltimand, and Cornelius. Ki;n. Well, we miallfiftlhim. Welcome, my good,friends' Say T c: :; .,aJ, what from our brother Norway ?,;i:. Moos fair return of greetings, and desires. Tpon our first, he sent out to suppress
239 His nephew's levies, which to him appear'd To be a preparation 'gainft the Polack: But better lookt into, he truly found It was againff your highness. Whereat griev'd, That so Tis sickness, age, and impotence Was falsely born in ha;nd, felds out arrests On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys, Receives rebuke fiom Norway ; and in fine, Makes vow before his uncle, never more To give th' aflay of arms against your Majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns, in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty herein further shewn, That it might please yon to oive quiet pars Through your dominions for this enterprize On such regards of safety and allowance, As therein are set down. King. It likes us well And at our more confider'd time we'll read, Anfwcr, and think upon this business. Mean time we thank you, for your a well-took labour. Go to your reft, at night we'll feast together. Most welcome home. [Ex. mLarf. Pol. This business is well ended. fM liege and madam, to expostulate \X hat Majesty flould be, what duty is, Why dayi is day, night night, and time is time, Were nothing but to ware night, day, and time. Therefore,' Rnce brevity's the foul of wit, And tedioufniefs the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief; your. noble son is mad. Mad call I it; for to define true madness, What is't, but to be nothing else but mad. But let that go. ?Deen. More matter, with less art. Pol. Madanm, I swear I ife no art at all: Thiat he is mad 'tis true 3 'tis true, 'tis pity,And ' zrenl-loo:k'd.
And pity, it is true; a foolish figure, But farewel it; for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him then ; and now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather fay, the cause of this defe&; For this effec defecive, comes by cause, Thus it remain:s, and the remainder thus-Perpend- I have a daughter; have, whilst she is mine, Who in her duty and obedience, mark, Hath giv'n me this; now gather, and surmise.,[ He opens a letter, and reads. ] To the cdsfiial, and my fo:l's idol, the most beautified Ophelia.-That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase, beautified is a vile phrase; but you shall hear - Thef to her ex- ciliert wl,'i ie bco.?, thee---,:'!;i!. Came this from Hamlet to her ? Pli. Go.i madam flay a while, I will be faithful.,D::d:'r th::, the jlars are fire, [Reading.,r:ebit, st.:t the fur, doth move; D^:bt tr:.th to Le a liar, E: ;. :.er do:dlt, I lIve. cbh ear Ophelia, I am ill at theft numbers; I have 7:St ir: ts rc; n.:ii' mj groans } but that I love thee befl, oh mfj I"eJ' lri:e-e .' Adieu.,,,.:r; ecermore, moji dear lady, vwhill,this Machine is to him, Hamler. This in obejience hath my daughter ihewn me: And more above, hath his follicitings, As they fell out by time, by means, and place, All givel to mine ear.,Ki;rg. But hov hath she receiv'd his love i Poa. Wha: do you thiFnk of me ? XiK-. As of a man, faithful and honourable 1i. I would fain prove so. But what might you think When: I had seen his hot love on the wing, (As I perceiv'd it, I must tell you that, Before my daughter told me,) what might you, Oi my dear Majesty your Queen here, think ?
If I had play'd the desk or table-book, Or given my heart working, mute and dumb, Or look'd upon this love with idle fight, What might you think ?- no, I went round to work, And my young miltrefs thus I did bespeak; Lord Hamlet is a prince out of thy sphere, This must not be and then, I precepts gave her, That she liould lock her self from his retort, Admit no meflengers, receive no tokens: Which done, [he took the fruits of my advice, And he repulsed, a short tale to make, Fell to a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watchin,- thence into a weakners, Thence to a lightness, and by this declension Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we wail for. King. Do you think this ? ueen. It may be very likely. Pol. Hath there been such a time, I'd fain know that, That I have positively said, 'tis so, When it prov'd otherwifeo King. Not that 1 know. Pal. Take t this from this, if this be otherwise If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the center. King. How may we try it further ? Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours to-,gether, Here in the lobby.,.ueen. So he does indeed. Pol. At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him, Be you and I behind an arras then, Mark the encounter: If he love her not, And be not from his reason faln thereon, Let me be no afliftant for a state, But keep a farm and carters,,King. We will try it. Vot. VIII. L SCENE,t pointing te his head and jdoulder..
SCENE V. Enter Hamlet reading. :teen. But look where, sadly, the poor wreth comes reading. Pcl. Away, I do beseech you, both away. I'll board him presently. [Exe. King and Gteei. Oh giveme leave. How does my good lord Hamlet ?,Ham. Well, God-a-mercy. Pai. Do you know me, my lord. Ham. Excellent well; y' are a fishmonger ? Poi. Not I, my lord. Eam. Then I would you were so honest a man. Pol. Honest, my lord Ham. Ay, Sir; to be honedf as this world goes, is to be one pick'd out of ten thousand.,Pol. That's very true, my lorld. Ham. For if the fun breed maggots in a dead dog, Being a good killing carrion- Have you a daughter ?,Pol. I have, my lord. Ham. Let her not walk i'th' fun; conception is a i'eflin2, but not as your daughter may conceive. Friend, lcok too'r.,P Hi. How fay you by that? frill harping on my,daughter -- Yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a.fifhmonger. He is far gone; and truly in my youth, [aside. I l;lered much extremity for love Very near this. I'll speak to him again. \\ hat do you read, my lord?,..;nI. Words, words, words. Pol. What is the matter, my lord.? .aw. Between whom ? Pci. I mean the matter that you read, my lord. Ham. Slanders, Sir: for the fatyrical slave fays here, that old men have gray beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging thick amber, and plum- tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of wir,,together
tooether with most weak hams. All which, Sir, tho' I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down: for your {elf, Sir, Ihall be as old as-I-am, if like a crab you could go backward.,Pal. Though this be madness, yet there's method in't: Will you walk out of the air, my lord ' Ham. Into my grave Pol. Indeed that is out o'th' air: How pregnant (sometimes) his replies are ? A happiness that often madners hits on, Which fanitv and reason could not be So profp'roflNy deliver'd of. I'11 leave him, And suddenly contrive the means of meeting Between him and my daughter. My honourable lord, I will most humbly Take my leave of you. Ham. You cannot,] Sir, take from me any thing that I will more willingly part withal, except my life. Pol. Fare you well, my lord. Ham. These tedious old fools. Pal. You go to seek lord Hamlet; there he is. [Exit.,SCENE VI. Enter Rofincrofe and Guildenftern. Rof. God save you, Sir. Guild. Mine honour'd lord ! Rof. My most dear lord ! Ham. My excellent good friends! how dost thou,Guildenflern ? Oh, Rofincrofe, gbod lads! how do ye both ? Rof. As the indifferent children of the earth. Guil. Happy, in that we are not over-happy; oit fortune's cap, we are not the very button. Ham. Nor the foals of her fiooe.? Rof. Neither, my lord. Hazm. Then you live about her waste, to ia the mid, dle of her favours ? Q;4il, aith, in her privates we,,L X sJw.
Ham. In the secret parts offortune ? oh, most true' Ihe is a strumpet. What news ',Rof. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honel. Ham. Then is dooms-day near; but your news is not true. t Let me question more in particular: what have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune, that the fends you to prison hither .,Guil. Prison, my lord! Ham. Denmark's a prison. Rof. Then is the world one. Ham. A goodly one, in which there are many con. fines, wards, and dungeons ; Denmark being one o'th' worf.,Rcf. We think not so, my lord. Ham. Why then, 'tis none to you; for there is no. thing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is a prison.,Rof Why then your ambition makes it one: 'tis too narrow for your mind.,Ham. Oh God, I could be bounded in a nut-shell, and count my self a King of infinite space were it .not that I have bad dreams.,Gii. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of the ambitious is meerly the shadow of a dream.,Ham. A dream it self is but a shadow. Rofi Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quali:y, that it is but a shadow's shadow.,Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our mo- narchs and out-ftretch'd heroes, the beggars Ihadows; Shall we to th' court ? for by my fay, I cannot reason,,Both. We'll wait upon you. Ha-m. No such matter. I will not fort you with the reft of my servants: for to speak to you like an honefi man, I am most dreadfully attended; but in the beat. en way of friendlhip, what make you at ElJinoor? Rof. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion. Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; butI thank you; and Cure, dear friends, my thanks are,too t From this mark,feveralfpeeches are not in the old dition.
too dear a half-penny. Were you not sent for ? is it your own inclining ? is it a free visitation ? come, deal juftlywithme; come, come; nay, speak. Gail. What should we fay, my lord ? Ham. Any thing but to the purpose. You were sent for; and there is a kind of confeflion in your looks, which your modeflies have not craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen have sent for you. Rof. To what end, my lord . lHam. That you must teach me ; but let me conjure you by the rights of our fellowlhip, by the confonan- cy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preferv- ed love, and by what more dear, a better proposer could charge you withal; be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for or no . Rof. What fay you ? Him. Nay then I have an eye of you: if you love me, hold not off. Gull. My lord, we were sent for. Ham. I will tell you why fTo shall my anticipation prevent your difcovcry, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no feather. I have of late, but wherefore I know not, loss all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercise; and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a fleril promontory; this moll excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave o'er-hanging fir- mament, this majeflical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me, than a foul and peffilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man ! how noble in reason! how infinite ia faculties! in form and moving how express and admi- rable! in acion how like an angel ! in apprehenfioa how like a God ! the beauty of the world, the paragon of animals ! antd yet to me, what is this quintessence of duff man delights not me; nor woman neither, though by your finiling you seem to fay so. Ro-f My lord there was no fitch suss in ny thoughts, Ham. Why did you laugh, when I said, man de- lights not me ? L 3 Rod,
Ref¥ To think, my lord, if you delight not in mnan, what lenten entertainment the Players shall receive from you we acccfted them on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.,Eara. He that plays the King shall be welcome; his majeftv f.all have tribute o me; the adventurous knight shall use his foyle and target; the lover shall not fish gratis the humorous man shall end his part in peace; and the lady Jhall fay her mind freely, or ihe blank verne shall halt for't. What players are they ',Roy. Even those you were wont to take delight in, 'ne Tragedians of the city,,aamr. Ho-i chances it t:ev travel? their residence both in reputation and profit was better, both ways.,Rj. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.,Ham. Do they hold the fame estimation they did when I was in the city ? are they so follow'd ?,Rcfi No indeed, they are not. Ham. How comes it ? do they grow rusty Ref Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace but there is, Sir, an t Airy of Children, little yafes, that cry out on the top of question; and are most tyrannically clapt for't these are now the fafhi. on, and so be-rattle the common ifages ( so they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose- quills, and dare scarce come thither.,Ham. What, are they'Children ? who maintains'em hkow are they escoted ? will they pursue the Quality no longer than they can sing ? will they not fay after- wards, if they fould grow themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means are no bet- ter:) their writers do them wrong to make them ex- claim against their own succession,Rol. Faith, there has been much to do on both fides; and the nation holds it no fin, to tarre them on to controverfie. There was for a while no money bid,for t Relating to thcplayhoafes then contending, the Bankside,,the Fortune, c,. - play'd by the Children of his m". jefty's (hbiplp.
for argument, unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.,Ham. Is't possible Guil. Oh there has been much throwing about of bIrains.,Ham. Do the boys carry it away Rofi Ay, that they do, my lord, Hercules and his load too.,Ham. It is not strange; for mine uncle is King of Denmark, and those that would make mowes at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducates a-peice, for his picure in little. There is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out. [FlouriJh for the players.,Guil. There are the players. Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elfinoor; your hands: come then, the appurtenance of wel- come is fafhior. and ceremony. Let me comply with you in this garbe, left my extent to the players (which I tell you must shew fairly outward) should more appear like entertainment than yours. You are welcome; but my Uncle-£ither and Aunt-mother are deceiv'd.,Guid. In what, my dear lord ? Ham. I am but mad north, north-west: when the wiid is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.,SCENE VII.,Enter Polonius. Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen. Ham. Hark you, Guildenfiern, and you too, at each ear a hearer; that great baby you fee there, is not yet out of his fwathling clouts.,Rof, Haply he's the second time come to them; for they fay, an old man is twice a child.,Ham. I will prophefie, he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it, you fay right, Sir; for og Monday morning 'twas so indeed.,Pel. My lord, I have news to tell you,,L 4 HaIm,
Ham. Mv lord, I have news to tell you. When Rofci::s was an actor in Rosre,Ps!. The actors are come hither, my lord. Ham. Buzze, buzze. P.i. Upon mine honour- Hi/n,. Then came each acor on his ass P-d. The be{s a&ors in the world, either for trage- dr, comedy, hiatory, pastoral, paltoral-comical, hifo- rical-paftoral, scene undividable, or poem unlimited, ':rze;a cannot be too heavv, nor Piautius too light, for the law of wit, and the liberty. These are the only men.,a.rr. ch Jephta, iidge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!,Poi. What a treasure had he, my lord ? Ham. WThy one fair da:;ihrcr, and no more, The which he lvc-ed p.ang well.,Pol. Still on my dauohter. Ham. Am I not i'th' right, old aephta ? Pol. If you call me Jethta, my lord, I have a dauehter that I love pafEng well.,Ham. Nay, that follows not. Pci. What follows then, my lord i Ham. Why as by lot, God -vot -and then you know, it came to pass, as most like it was; the sirs row of the t rubrick will shew you more. For look where my abridgements come.,Enter four or five players. Y'are welcome masters, welcome all. I am glad to fee thee well ; welcome good friends. Oh ! old friend! thy face is b valanc'd since 1 saw thee last: com'ft thou to beard me in Denmark ? What my young lady and mistress ? berlady your ladyship is nearer heaven than when I saw you lapt, by the alti- tude of a t chioppine. Pray God your voice, like a,piece t Rubrick. It is Pons chansons in the firfi folio di:- t;on. The old ballads fng on bridges, and from thence rall'd Pons chansons. Hamlet is here repeating ends o,ald longs. b valiant. :t Chioppine, a hih-held'dflJot, er a flippIe.
piece of uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring. - Mailers, you are all welcome; we'll e'ere to't like c friendly faulconers, fly at any thing we fee; we'll have a speech itraight. Come, give us a taste of your qualityi come, a passionate speech.,I Play. What speech, my good lord? Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never afted: or if it was, not above once, for the play I remember pleas'd not the million, 'twas Caviar to the general; but it was, (as I receiv'd it, and others, whose judgment in such matters cryed in the top of mine) an excellent play; well digeted in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cun- ning. I remember one laid, there was no d salt ini the lines, to make the matter savoury, nor no mat- ter in the phrase, that might indite the author of t affelion; but call'd it, an honeit method. One speech in it I chiefly lov'd; 'twas Efneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at this line, let me fee, let me fee - The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast. It is not so - it begins with Pyrrhus. The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose fable arms Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse; Hath now his dread and black completion lmear'd With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total geules; horridly trickt With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, B]k'd and impafted with the parching e fires, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To murthers vile. Roaited in wrath and fire, And thus o'er-cifed with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old granfire Priam seeks.,L Pol french. a fallet. t or passion, afefcus. This whole speech of Hamlet is purely ironical, he seems to commend this play, to expose the bombajle of it; who was its author is not come to my knowledge. e fireets.
Pcl. 'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent, and good discretion.,I P.iy. Anon he finds him, Striking, too short, at Greeks. His antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it fills Repugnant to command; unequal match'd, Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage trikes wide; But with the whif and wind of his fell sword Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Fyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of rev'rend Priam, feem'd i'th' air to flick: So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus flood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But as we often fee against some torm, A silence in the heav'ns, the rack fland still, The bold winds speechless, and the orb below As ihufh as death: anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region. So after Pyrrhus' pause, A rowsed vengeance sets him new a-work, And never did the Cyclops hammers fall On Mars his armour, forg'd for proof eterne, With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword Now falls on Priam.- Out, out, thou (trumpet-fortune ! all you gods, In general fynod take away her power: Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of heav'n, As low as to the fiends.,PcI. This is too long. Ham. It Pnall to th'barber's with your beard. Pr'v- thee fay on; he's for a jigg, or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on, come to Hecuba.,i Play. But who, oh who, had seen the f mobled,Queen,fiHam, edition, it is enbled Quee. s I: theri fclio edition, it is th' enobled Queen.
Ham. The mobled Queen? Poi. That's good; mobled Queen, is good. X Play. Run bare-foot up and down, threatning the,flames With biffon rheum; a clout upon that head, Where late the diadem flood, and for a robe About her lank and all o'er-teemed loyns, A blanket in th' alarm of fear caught up. Who this had seen, with tongue in venom fteep'd, 'Gainft fortune's fate would treason have pronounc'd: But if the gods themselves did fee her then, When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs; The instant burst of clamour that she made, (Unlefs.things mortal move them not at all) Would have made g melt the burning eyes of heaven; And paflion in the gods.,Pol. Look if he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's eyes. Pr'ythee no more.,Ham. 'Tis well, I'll have thee speak out the reft of this soon. Good my lord, will you fee the players well beftow'd. Do ye hear, let them be well us'd; for they are the abltraa, and brief chronicles of the time. After your death, you were better have a bad epitaph, than their ill report while you liv'd.,Pol. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.,Ham. Gods bodikins man, much better. Use eve- ry man after his desert, and who Ihall scape whip- ping? use them after your own honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.,Pol. Come, Sirs. [Exit Polonius. Ham. Follow him, friends: we'll hear a play to- morrow. Dofl thou hear me, old friend, can you play the murther of Gonxago?,Play. Ay, my lord. Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could for a need study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which 1 would set down, and insert in't ,.could ye not ?,a 7ilich, 7 .Play,
Flay. Ay, my lord. Ham. Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not. My good friends, i'll leave you 'till night, you are welcome to Elfinoor.,Rof Good my lord. [Exeunt.,S C E N E VIII.,Manet Hamlet. Ham. Ay so, God b' w' ye: now I am alone. Oh what a rogue and peasant slave am I . Is it not monstrous that this player here, But in a fi&ion, in a dream of paflion, Could force his foul so to his own conceit, That from her working, all his visage warm'd: Tears in his eves, diftracion in his aspet, A broken voice, and his whole function suiting With forms, to his conceit i and all for nothing ? Tor Hecuba ? What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, That he should weep for her? what would he do, Had he the motive and the cue for passion That I have'. he would drown the s{age with tears, And cleave the gen'ral ear with horrid speech, Make mad the guilty, and appall the free, Confound the ign'r.int, and amaze indeed The very faculty of eyes and ars.---,Yet I fay not!hing; no, not for a King, Upon whose property and most dear life A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward S Who cal!s me vilhin, breaks my pate a-cross, Plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face . 'Tweaks me by th' nose, gives me the lye i'l' th roat, As deep as to the lungs ' who does me this . Yet I rfhould take it- for it cannot be,,But h 2et I, A dull and mudd y metled rafial peak Li.e John-a-dreamr, unpregnant of my caujfe, ind. can fay nothing .i a ! -hy J7io;ld I take it ?
But I am pigeon-liver'd, and lack gall To make oppression bitters or ere this, I should have fatted all the region kites With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain! Remorseless, treacherous, letcherous,-kindlefs villain! Why what an ass am I ? this is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murthered, Prompted to my revenge by heav'n and hell, Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words, And fall a cursing like a very drab - A k tallion. -- fye upon't! foll! - about-my,brain! - I've heard, that guilty creatures, at a play, Have by the very cunning of the scene Been itruck so to the four, that prefewtly They have proclaim'd their malefa:aions. For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak With molt miraculous organ. I'11 have there players, Play something like the murther of my father, Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks, I'll tent him to the quick; if he but blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be the devil, and the devil hath power T' assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps Out of my weakness and my melancholy, (As he is very potent with such spirits) Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds Mo;i relative than this: The play's the thing, Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King. [Exit,,k fclilion.,I__,ACT
ACT 111. SCENE I.,The P LA C E. Evter Kixg, Qteen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosin,crofte, Guildenftern, and Lords.,K I N G. ND can you by no drift of a conference Get from him why he puts on this 21A ^ ssi b confusion,,Grating so harshly all his days of quiet, With turbulent and dang'rous lunacy Rof. He does confess he feels himself,diftra&ed; 'But from what cause he will by no means speak.,Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be foundedi But with a crafty madness keeps aloof, When we would bring him on to tome confeflion Of his true state.,lgeen. Did he receive you well Rof. MAof like a gentleman. G:.l. But with much forcing of his difpoftion. Rof. Niggard of question, but of our demands Mofi free in iis reply.,P.een. Did you assay him to any pastime Rof. Madam, it so fell out, that certain players We o'er-took on the way; of there we told him; And there did seem in him a kind of joy To hear of it: they are about the court, And (as I think) they have already order This night to play before him.,a' circranlanCe.,b honjstcn.
Pol. 'Tis most true: And he befeech'd me to entreat your majeftieg To hear and fee the matter.,King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me To hear him so inclin'd. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his purpose into there delights.,Rof. We shall, my lord. [Exeunt. King. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too, For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither, That he, as 'twere by accident, may here Affiont Ophelia, Her father, and my self, Will so bestow our'selves, 'that feeing unseen We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by him, as he is behaved, If't be th' affiifion of his love, or no, That thus he su'ffers for.,Tueen. I lhall obey you: And for my part, Ophelia, I do wish That your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet's wildness. So I hope your virtues May bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honours.,oph. Madam, I wvilh it may. Pol. Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious, so pleafeye; We will beflow our selves: read on this book; That ihew of such an exercise may colour Your l'oneliness. We're oft to blame in this, 'Tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's 'visage, And pious a&ion We do fuger o'er The devil himself,King. Oh 'tis too true. How smart a lafl that speech doth give my confcienc*!,[ajide. The harlot's cheek beautied with plaftring art Is not mote ugly to the thing that helps it, Than is my deed to my most painted word. Oh heavy burthen!,Pol, I hear him coming, let's withdrawmy lord.,[Exeunt all but Ophelia.,SCENE
SCENE IL,Enter Hamlet. Ham. To be, or not to be i that is the queftioa - Whether 'tis nobler in the mind, to susser The flings and arrows of outragious fortune; Or to take arms against a t sea of troubles, And by opposing end them --To die,- to sleep - No more; and by a sleep to fay we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to ; 'tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish'd. To die-- to sleep-- To sleep ' perchance to dream; ay, there's the rub- For in that sleep of death what dreams may come, When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause. There's the refpe& That makes calamity of so long life. For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, Th' oppressor's wrong, the c proud man's contumely, The pang of defpis'd love, the law's delay, The insolence of office, and the spurns That patient merit of th' unworthy takes; When he himself might his l.aietus make With a bare bodkin ? who would fardles bear, To groan and sweat under a weary life ? But that the dread of something after death, (That undifcover'd country, from whose bourne No traveller returns) puzzles the will, And makes us rather bear those ills we have, Than fly to others that we know not of. Thus conscience does make cowards of us all: And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o'er with the pale cant of thought; And enterprizes of grear pith and moment, With this regard, their currents turn d awry,And t Perhaps fieie, which continues the metaphor of flings, arrows, taking arms *and represents the bring efompafs'd orn all fides wih troubles.,poor, d away.
And lose the name of a&ion. --- Soft you now,,[Seeing Oph, The fair Ophelia ? nymph, in thy oraifons Be all my fins remembred.,oph. Good my lord, How does your honour for this many a day,Ham. I humbly thank you; well, - oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yours, That I have longed much to re-deliver. I pray you now receive them.,Ham. No, I never gave you ought. oph. My honour'd lord, I know right well you did, And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd, As made the things more rich: that perfume loft, Take these again; for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor, when givers prove unkind. There, my lord.,Hlam. Ha, ha! are you honest oph. My lord- Ham. Are you fair Oph. What means your lordship ? Ham. That if you be honest and fair, you should admit no discourse to your beauty.,oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better com- merce than with honesty ?,Ham. Av truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty fiom what it is, to a bawd; than the force of honesty can translate beauty into its like- ness. This was sometimes a paradox, but now the time oives it proof. I did love you once.,op,. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so. Ham. You should not have believed me. For vir- tue cannot so c innoculate our old flock, btrtwe shall relish of it. f I lov'd you not.,Oph. I was the more deceived. Ham. Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be a breeder of finners ? am my self indifferent ho- nell, but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it,were evacuate in the firfl edition. f I did love yeu once
were better my mother had not born me. I am ve- ry proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck, than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to a& them in. What fIould such fellows as I do crawling be. tween heav'n and earth a we are arrant knaves, be- lieve none of us - Go thy ways to a nunnery Where's your father ',Oph. At home, my lord. Ham. Let the doors be Pnut upon him, that he may play the fool no where but in's own house. Yarewel.,Oph. Oh help him, you sweet heav'ns! Ham. If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowrr. Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou faal not escape calumny - Get thee to a nunnery,- farewel-- Or if thou wilt needs marry, marrv a fool for wife men know well e- nough, what monflers you make of them--- To a nunnery go - and quickly too: farewel.,Oph. Heav'nly powers! restore him. 1am. I have heard of your g painting too, well enough: God has given you one h face, and you make your self another. You jig, you amble, and you litp, and nick-name God's creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go, I'll no more on't, it hath made me mad. I fay, we will have no more marriages. Those that are married already, all but one, shall live, the reft shall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go. [Exit Hamlet.,oph. Oh what a noble mind is here o'erthrown! The courtiers, soldiers, scholars, eye, tongue, sword! Th'expetancy and rose of the fair slate, The glass of fashion, and the mould of form, Th' obferv'd of all observers, quite, quite down! I am of ladies most deject and wretched, That fuck'd the hony of his mufick vows: Now fee that noble and most sovereign reason,,Like b pace. g pra.ling,
Like sweet bells jangled out of tune, and harsh; That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth, Blasted with ecftafie. Oh woe is me ! T'have seen what I have seen; fee what I fee.,SCENE III. Enter King and Polonius. King. Love ! his affections do not that way tend, Nor what he spake, tho' it lack'd form a little, Was not like madness. Something's in his foul, O'er which his melancholy fits on brood, And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose Will be some danger, which how to prevent, I have in quick determination Thus set it down. He shall with speed to England, For the demand of our negleted tribute; Haply the seas and countries different, With variable objets, aila, expel This something fettled matter in his heart; Whereon his brains still beating, puts him thus From fashion of himself. What think you on't ?,Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I believe The origin and commencement of this grief Sprung from negleced love. How now, ophelia You need not tell us what lord Harmlt said, We heard it all. My lord, do as you please; But if you hold it fit after the play, Let his Queen-mother all alone intreat him To shew his griefs; let her be round with him: And I'll be plac'd, so please you, in the ear Of all their conf'rence. If Ihe find him not, To England fend him; or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think.,King. It stall be So: Madness in great ones mull not unwatch'd go. [Exe;,SCENE
SCENE IV. Enter Hamlet, and two or three of the Players. Ham. PEAK the speech I pray you, as I pro-,O nounc'd it to you, trippingly on the tongue But if you mouth it, as many of our Players do, I had as lieve the town-crier had spoke my lines. And do not saw the air too much with your hand thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may fay, whirl-wind of your paflion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. Oh, it offends me to the foul, to hear a robuftous periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tat- ters, to verv rags, to split the ears of the ground- lings : who (for the most part) are capable of no- thing, but inexplicable dumb Ihews, and noise I could have such a fellow whipt for o'er-doing terma- gant; it out-herods Hertd. Pray you avoid it.,Play. I warrant your honour. Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your tutor. Sute the aaion to the word, the word to the acion 5 with this special observance, that you o'er-lfep not the modeftv of nature; for a- ny thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as 'twere the mirror up to nature; to shew vir- tue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time, his form and pref- sure. Now this over-done, or come tardy off, tho' it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the ju- dicious grieve: the censure of which one, mufc in your allowance o'er-fwav a whole theatre of others. Oh, there be Players that I have seen play,.andheard others praise and that highly, (not to speak it pro- phane!v) that neither having the accent of chriflian, or the gate of chriltian, pagan, i or iaan, have so Rrut-,ted r Norman.
ted and bellow'd, that I have thought some of na. ture's journey-men had made men, and not made them well; they imitated humanity so abominably.,play. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us.,Ham. Oh reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns, speak no more than is set down for them: For there be of them that will themselves laugh, to let on some quantity of barren fpe&ators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necefla- ry quellion of the play be then to be confidered: That's villanous, and Ihews a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.,[Exeunt Players. Enter Polonius, Rofincroffe, and Guildenflern. How now, my lord . will the King hear this piece of,work . Pol. And the Queen too, and that presently. Ham. Bid the Players make haste. [Exit Polonius, Will you tivo help to haften them ? Both. We will, my lord. [Exe;tnt,,SCENE V. Enter Horatio to Hamlet. Ham. What ho, Horatio? Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service. Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as jufr a man As e'er my conversation coap'd withal.,Nor. Oh my dear lord-- Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter: For what advancement may I hope from thee, That no revenue haft, but thy good spirits To feed and cloath thee ? Should the poor be flatter'd! No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee, Where thrift may follow fawning. Dolt thou hear ? Since my dear foul was mittrefs of her choice, And could of men distinguish, her eleCtion,}lath
Hath seal'd thee for her fell. For thou haft been As one, in suffering all that suffers nothing. A man, that fortune's buffets and rewards' Hath ra'en with equal thanks. And blef are those, Whose blood and judgment are so well comingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger To found what stop she please. Give me that man That is not paflion's slave, and I will wear him In my heart's core: ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee. Something too much of this.- There is a play to-night before the King, One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee, of my father's death, I pr'ythee, when thou feeft that a& a-foot, Ev'n with the very comment of thy foul Observe mine uncle : if his occult guilt Do not it self unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen: And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan's t flithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join, To censure of his seeming.,Ior. Well, my lord. If he steal ought the whilf this play is playing, And scape detecting, I will pay the theft,,SCENE VI. Enter Kin',, *.een, Polonius, Ophelia, Rofincrofle,,Guildenftern, and other lords itttesdant, with a guard carrying torches. Danili march. Sotund a flourijlh. Ham. They're coming to the play; I murf be idle. Get you a place.,King. How fares our cousin Hamlet? Ham. Excellent i'faith, of the camelion's dih: I eat the air, promife-cramm'd: you cannot feed ca- pons so.,4i .~g, j Stithy, a smith's anvil,
King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet, these words are not mine. Ham. No, nor mine - Now, my lord, you plaid once i'th' university, you fay ? [To Polonius. Pol. That I did, imy lord, and was accounted a good ator. Ham. And what did you enact Pol. I did enact Juliis Cafar, I was kill'd i'th' ca- pitol: Brutus kill'd me. Ham. It was a brute part of him, to kill so capi- tal a calf there. Be the players ready? Rof Ay, my lord, they stay upon your patience. u9ern. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, fit by me. Ham. No, good mother, here's mettle more attrah Pol. Oh ho, do you mark that ? [ctive. Ham. Lady, shall I lye in your lap ?,[Lying down at Ophelia's feet. Oph. No, my lord. Ham. Do you think I meant country matters ? oph. I think nothing, my lord. Ham. That's a fair thought to lye between a maid's oph. What is, my lord [legs, Ham. Nothing. oph. You are merry, my lord. ltar. Who, I? Oph. Ay, my lord. Ham. Oh God, your only jig-maker; what should a man do, but be merry For look you how chear- fully my mother looks, and my father dy'd within there two hours. oph. Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord. Hain. So long? nay then let the devil wear black, for I'll have a suit of fables. Oh heav'ns! dye two months ago, and not forgotten yet! then there's hope, a great man's memory may out-live his life half a year: but by'r-lady he mufl build churches then; or else shall he susser not thinking on, with the hobby- horse; whose epitaph is For oh, for oh, the hobby-hcrfe s forgot.,SCENE
SCENE VII. Hautboys play. The dumb flhew enters. Enter a King and lueen, very lovingly ; the §ueen embracing him, and he her. She kneels, he takes her up, and declines his head upon her neck. L4ys him down upon a bank f flowers, she feeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes of his crown, kists it, and pours poison in the KinA's ears, and Exit. The ,ueen returns, finds the King dead, and makes passionate aEtion. The poisoner, with fomai two or three mutes come in again, seeming to lament with her. The dead body is carried away. The poi. fornr w-ces the Oaueen with gifts, flje seems loth and unwilling a while, but ix the end accepts his love.,[Exeunt, oph. What means this, my lord ? Ham. Marry this is miching Malicho, that means mischief.,oph. Belike this shew imports the argument of the play ?,Ham. We shall know by this fellow : the Players cannot keep counsel, they'll tell all.,Oph. Will he tell us what this shew meant ? Ham. Ay, or any shew that you'll flew him. Be not you afiamed to 'hew, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.,Oph. You are naught, you are naught, I'll mark the play.,Enter Prologue. For us, and for our tragedy, Here fiooping to your clemency, We beg your hearing patiently. Ham. Is this a prologue, or the pofie of a ring? Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord. Ham. As woman's love.,a,Enter
Enter King and aLueen, Players. King. Full thirty times hath Phebus' car gone round Neptunie's salt walh, and Tellus' orbed ground And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen About the world have time twelve thirties'been, Since love our;,heartS, and'Hymen did our hands Unite copimutual, ,i nmo. sacred bands.,ueen. So maliy journeys may the fun and moon Make us again count o'er, ere love be done. But woe is me, you are so sick of late, So far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you; yet though I'diflruft, Difconifort you, nimy lod, it nothing mut:. And womes' fear and'love hold quaitity, 'Tis either none, br in extremity'; Now what my love is, p'6oof hath made you know, And as my love'is six'd,' my fear is so. King. Faith I muit leaye'thee, love, and shortly too D My operant powers their fun&ions leave to do, And thou Ihalt live in this fair world behind, Honour'd, beloy'd, and haply one as kind For.lhusband shalt thou-,2c»icn;' Oh. 'cofound the ret . Such love 'muf needs be treason in my breast: In second 'liusband'let me be accurfi, None' wed the fecbod; but who kill'd the firif. Ham.' Wormwood, wormwood ! @.teen, The instances that second marriage move, Are base refpets of thlift, but none of love. A second time I kill my husband dead, When' second husband kisses me in bed. Kirc. I do believe you think what now 3ou fpea'c But what we do determine, oft we break: Purpose is but the save to memory,' Of violent birth, but poor validity : Which now, like fruits unripe, sticks on the tree, .But fall unlhaken, when they mellow be. hloft necfairy 'tis that we forget, To pay our selves what to our selves is debt:,Yoi. VIII. M War
What to our selves in paflon we propose, The paiiou ending, doth. the purpose lore; The violence of either orief or joy, Their own enadors wits themfelyes destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth mbo lament; Grief joys, joy:grieves on' lender accident. This world is not for aye, and':tis not fttange That ev'n our loves should with- our fortunes change For 'tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love fortune lead, or fortune'love. The great man down, you mark his' fav'rite flies The poor, advanc'd, makes friends of enemies: And hitherto doth love on fortune tend, For who not needs, shall never lack a'friend And who in want a hollow friend 'doth try, Dire&ly feafaos him his enemy. But orderly to .end where I begun, Our 'wills and fates do so contrary run, That our devices till are overthrown, Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own, So think thou wilt no second husband wed, But die thy thoughts, when thy sirs lord is dead.,uyeen. Nor earth to oive me food, nor heavea ligh Sport and repose lock fom me, day and-night; Eich opposite that blanks the face of joy, Meet what Iwould have well, and it destroy, Both here, and hence, pursue me-liating ifrife! If once a widow, ever ' be wife.,Ham. If fie ihould break it now- 3Kis:.'Tis deeply sworn; sweet, leave me here a wlilei My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile The tedious day with sleep. [Slep,Queen. Sleep rock thy brain, And never come mischance between us twain! [Exit,Ham. Madam, how like you this play iee.T The lady protests too much, methinks. Ham. Oh but [he'll keep her word. Kin:. Have you heard the argument, is there n offence in't ?,/ia.'
Ham. No, no, they do but jest, poison in jelf, no offence i'th' world. King. What do you call the play ? Ham. The -Moiufe;trap. Marry how ? tropically. This play is,-theimageof!-amuither donein, Vienna; Gonzago is the 'duke's namre, his wife:.B4ptifa you fiall fee,anon, 'tis. a-,knaviih piece of work ,,but w-hat o' that ?'your nmajefty, and--we'.that ,have free: fouls, .it touches .us- not.; let the; gall d.ade winch, ;our.wi- thers. are unwrutig.,Enter i lcianus. This is one Lucianus, nephew to the; duke. oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord. Ham. I could, interpret-betwveen you and your love s if I could fee the puppets ldallying. oph. You arckeen, :.y-lord,,yout are.keen, Ham. It would cost you a groaling,. to.take;off my oph. Still worse andt worse. · [edge. Ham. -So you munfttake your husbands. ' Begin murtherer...Leave thy damnable facesj,and.begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge. Luc. Thoughts:.black, . hands- apt, : drugs fit, ald,time agreeing: Confederate, eafon, elCe no creature feeing Thou mixture rank- of'midnight-weeds collec'ed, vWith Hecates bane, tthrice;blfte.d, thrice infested, Thy natural magick, and dire property, On wholfome life:,ufurp immediately.,'j|~ [REPours, the -poison -in his; ears. Ham. He poyfons him i'th' garden for's estate; his name's GonMago; the fory, is extant, and writ in choice Italian. You shall fee anon how thei,mtirtherer-gets the love of Gonzago.'s-ife. I Oh. The King rites. I ,uen. ;How fares 'my lord Pol. Give o'er the play. Kine. Give me some light. Away. ii..,Lights, .lights, lights ! [FxeSnt.,M z SC FNE
'SCENE VIII.. 3laxent Hamlet and Horatio. Ham. Why let the strucken deer go weep,,The hart ungalled play: For some mufft watch, whilst some mull sleep;,So runs the world away. Would not this, Sir, and a forest of feathers, (if the reft of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two pro. vincial roses on my . rayed shooes, get me a fellow. flip in ab city of Players, Sir ',Her. Halt a Ihare. Ham. A whole one I. For thou dost know, oh Damen dear,,This realm difinantled was Of 'o-'e himself, and now reigns here,A very very c peacock. Her. You might have rim'd. Ham. Oh good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand pounds. Didif perceive,Hor. Very well, my lord. Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning ? Hor. I did very well note him.,Enter Rofincroffe and Guildenftern. Ham. Oh, ha! come Come mufick. Come the re.,corders. For if the King like not the comedy; Why then belike he likes it not perdy. Come, some mufick.,Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you. ham. Sir, a whole history. Guil. The King, Sir- H1am. Ay Sir, what of him ? Gui!. Is in his retirement, marvellous diffemper'd-,main. rack'.l, rac'i. b cry. c paj"c. This allaldes t a Fable, of the Birds chufing a King; iniead of the Easgli a Peck. C-.
260 Ham. With drink, Sir? Guil. No, my lord, with choler. Ham. Your wisdom should shew it self more rich to fignifie this to his doftor: for me to put him to his purgation, would perhaps plunge him into more choler. Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into rome frame, and flart not so wildly from my affair. Han. I am tame, Sir, pronounce. Guil. The Queen your mother, in most great affli- Etion of spirit, hath cent me to you. ,Ham. You are welcome. Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtefie is not of the right breed. If it'fhall please you to make me a wvlolIom answer, I will do your mother's command- ment; if not, your pardon, and my return fliall bl the end of my bufilefs. Hlam. Sir, I cannot. Gcil. What, my lord HIam. Make you a wholfom answer: my wit's di- seas'd. But, Sir, such answers as 1 can make, you flill command or rather as you fay, my mother-- tlherefore no more but to the matter - my mother, ou fay -- Rof. Then thus she fays your behaviour hath l ruck her into amazement, and admiration. Ham. Oh wonderful son, that can so altonifh a mother! But is there no sequel at the heels of this mo- ther's admiration Rof. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed. Ham. We Ihall obey, were Ihe ten times our mo- ther. Have you any further trade with us ? Rofi My lord, you once did love me. Ham. So I do still, by these pickers and ltealers. Rof. Good my lord, what is your cause of diftem- per? you do firely bar the door of your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to your friend. Ham. Sir, I lack advancement.,M3 Ro , .
Rof. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself, for your succession in Denmark ?,Ham. Av, but while thegrafs grows - the proverb is fomethn muftv.,Enter one with a Recorder. Oh the recorders, let me fee one. To withdrawwith you---why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil ?,Guil. Oh my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love ;s too unmannerly.,Ham. I do not wellunderfland that. Will you play upon this pipe ?,;:til. Miv lord, I cannot. Eam. I pray you. G:i . EBlieve me, I cannot. ia;r. I do bcfeech you. Guii. I know no touch of it, my lord. Ha;;. 'Tis as eafie as lying , govern these ventiges with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent mufick. Look-you, these are the.ltops.,Guil. But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony, I have not the skill.,g'am. Why look you nonw how, unworthy a thing you make of me-; you would play upon me, you vi.ould seem to know-my flops; you would pluck'out the heart of my myflervi you would found me from mr- lowveft note, to the top of my compa(s; and there is much mufick, excellent voice, in this little organ, vet cannot you make it speak. Why do you think that I am eaftr 'to be plaid on than a pipe ? call me what inRrrument you will, t-ough you canfretme, you can. .,l: lay upon mn; God bless you, Sir.,Enter Polonius. Pol: My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.,Ham. Do you fee yonder cloud, that's almost in frape of a Calu;el ?,7~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~- Iot,Pol, 7
Pol. By the mass, and it's like a Camel indeed. Ham. Methinks it is like an t Ouzle. Pol. It is black like an Quzle. Ham. Or like a Whale Pol. Very like a Whale. Ham. Then will I come to my mother by and by- they fool me to the top of my bent, - I will come by and by.,Pol. I will fay so. Ham. By and by is easily said. Leave, me fiiends.,[Exeunt. 'Tis now the very witching time of night, When church-yards yawn, and hell it self breaths out Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot,blood, And do such bitter business as the day Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother - Oh heart, lose not thy. nature,. let not ever The foul of N7ero enter this firm bosom; Let me be cruel, not unnatural; I will fpeak;daggers to her, but. use none. My tongue and foul in this be hypocrites ! [Exit.,S C E.N E, IX, rnter King, Rofincrofle, and Guildenflern. King. I like him not, nor fiands it safe with us To let his madness rage. Thereforc prepare you; I your commission will forthwith dispatch, And he to England shall along,with you. The terms of our. estate may not endure Hazard so near: us, as doth ,hourly grow Out of his lunacies. Guild. We will provide our, selves; Most holy and religious fear ,it is, To keep thoae many bodies safe, that live And feed upon your. majety. Ro:f The single and peculiar life is bound,M . With t An Ouzle or Blackbird it has been printed by mi- flake a Weefel, which is not black.
With all the strength and armour of the mind, To keep it self from noyance; but much more, Tiat lpirit, on whose a weal depends and refts The lives of many. The decease of majesty Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw What's near it with it. It's a massy wheel Fxt on the summit of the highest mount, To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things Are mortiz'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls, Each (mail annexment, petty consequence, Attends the boiflrous ruin. Ne'er alone Did the King sigh, but with a general groan.,King. Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage; For we will fetters put upon this fear, \Vb ich now goes too free-footed.,st:b. We will hafle us. [Exeunt Gent.,Enter Polonius. Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet; Behind the arras I'll convey my self To hear the p.rocess. I'll warrant she'll tax him home; An. as you laid, and wifely was it said, 'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother, (Since nature makes them partial,) flould o'er-hear The speech of vantage. Fare you well my liege, I'li call upon you ere you go to bed, And tell you what I know. [Exit.,King. Thanks, dear my lord. · Oh my offence is rank, it finells to heav'n, It hath the primal eldest curse upon't; A brother's murther. Pray 1 cannot, Though inclination be as sharp as will: Mv fironger guilt defeats my strong intent, And like a man to double business bound, I tand in pause where I shall first begin, And both negle&. What if this curfedi hand Were thicker than it fell with brother's blood is there not rain enough in the sweet heav'ns To wash it white as snow . whereto serves mercy,,¢ But - * firir,
' But to confront the visage of offence? And what's in prayer, but this two-fold force, ( To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall, ( Or pardon'd being down then I'll look up. ( My fault is pal. But oh what form of prayer · Can serve my turn ; Forgive me my foul murther! ' That cannot be, since I am still poffeit ' Of those effe&s for which I did the murther, ' My crown, mine own ambition, and my Queen'. r May one be pardon'd, and retain th' offence ' In the corrupted currents of this world, ' Offence's gildedd hand may flove by justice ' And oft 'tis seen, .the wicked prize it self ' Buys out the law; but 'tis not so above: ' There is no fhuflhing, there the ation lies ' In his true nature, we our selves compell'd ' v'n to the- teeth and forehead of our faults,. ' To give in evidence.' . Whatthen? what rests Try what repentance-can. 'What can it not Yet what can it, when one cannot repent ? Oh wretched state! oh bofohi, black as death! Oh limed foul, that ftrugling to be free Art more engag'd !- help angels, 'make affa)! Bow fubborn knees; and heart with strings of ffeel Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe! All may be well. [The King knetls,S C.E N E X.,Enter Hamlet. Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying, And& now I'll do't,-- and so he goes to heav'n, And so am I reveng'd'? that would be scann'd, - A villain kills my father, and for that I, his sole son, do this fame villain fend To heav'n-'O this is b hire'nd fallery, not revenge, He took rny-father grofly, full of bread, With all iis crimes broad' blown; as c fllfh as May ; And how his audit hands, who knows, save heav'n?,''' : ' : ' But * b base and filly. Ed. prim. c fref. 8
But in our circumflance and course of:thought, 'Tis heavy with him: Am I their rereng'd, To take him in the purging of lhis foul; When he is fit and fealon'ddfor his-pafige ?' Up sword, and know thou'a more-horriad'time- When he is drunk, asleep, or. in his rage; Or in rh' incestuous pleasure .nfhis-bed; At gaming, swearing, or.about'fome ass That has no reli[h of falvaiion in't; Then trip him, that his heels mnykidckatfheav'h, And that his fbul may be as damn'd andf.bhack As hell, whereto.it goes. MY' mother sari; This phyfick but prolongs- thy sickly days. [ ilL,King. My words fiy up, my thoughtsremain b'elow; Words, without thoughts, neverto heaven go. ['Exir.,SC.EE N XL th Q.een'i Apartrnent; Enttr Quieen ani Polniu.t Pol.HE mwill comawftraight . looklyou lay hoe' .tao,him, Tell him his pranks have been too broad'to bear with, And that your Grace hath screen'd, and stood between Much heat and him. I'll silence me.e'en here Pray you be round.,eeer. I'll warrant you, fear me not. 'WiAtraw, I hear him coming. ;,[.Polonius hides mfelf-bihin thl iArras;,Enter· Hamlet. Ham. Now, mother; what's the matter? ueen. Hamlet, thou haft thy father much offended; Ham. Mother, you have my father much-offended. Gieen. Come, come, you answer. with; an idle,tongue. Ham. Go, go, you quefionwith e a wicked tongue.,da bn , . .- _ 7- ;,- ^A jutS
z7F etten. Whyihow now,. Hatlet: Ham. What's thec.matter now., Lueen. Have;youg.f'g otm.e- . Ham. NO, by. the: rootd, not so;, You are the Queen, your.,husband's br.otler's,wife, And (would it werenotfoe .you are;,my.mother,,~iueu. Nay, then I'll set those to youthat.can speak, .Ham. Come, come, and fityou,do,wn,;yoquIAhall not,budge.: You go, not'tillI set yo~ujup a glass Where you may fee the; inmot :part of-y.u. gtueen What wiltthou dQ,? thou wilt.not!murthlerlme )- Help, ho. Pol. What ho,. ,elp. [BcdiFd.the Arras, Ham. How now, a rat,.? deadfor.a,ducate, dead. Pol. Oh I am slain. - [Ham..kills Polonius Qcuen. Oh me, watihaft thou done . Ham. Nay I. know not: is it. the King ? ueen. Oh, what-.airalh.and; b.loody,.deed is this! MHm. A bloody,,deed, almoft.as bad,, good mother, As kill a King, and marry with his brother. tueen. As kill, a, iRig, . Ham. Ay lady, 'twas my word. Thou wretched; ra{h,. intruding,fooll farewel.,[To Polonilus. I took thee for thy betterj take thyiforrnne; Thou find?'t, to. be too bufie, is some. dangerl Leave wringing ot fyour hands., peace, fit you down. And let me wrinagyou, heart, for:f6 I flall: If it be made of. penetrable. stuff If damned custom. have; not. braiz'd itifo,. That it is proof and bulwark, againftiffenfe. atuetn. What have I.done, that.thoudar'.ft\iva :r.,tongue. In noise so rude againft;me ,,Ham. Such an as, That blurs the grace and blulh of modesty, Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off:die rose. From the fair forehead ofEan.iniiocent.lb'e; Ahd'fits a blitter there , makes marriae-vows,, " . . '
As faife as dicers oaths. Oh such a deed, As from the body of contration plucks The very foul, and sweet religion makes A rhapsody of words. Heav'n's face doth glow O'er this solidity and compound mass, With trifitfl visage as against the doom. 'Tis thought-fick at the a&.,1een. Ay me, what. at, That roars so loud, and thunders in the index ?,Ham. Look here upon this piture, and on this, The counterfeit presentment of two brothers: See what a grace was feated on this-brow, ipyferion's curies, the front of Jove himself, An eve like Maars, to threaten or command, A itation like the herald MercKry New-lighted-on a heav'n-kiling hill A combination, and a form indeed, Where every God did seem to set his Teal, To give the world aflurance of a man. This was your husband. - Look you now what,follows, Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear, Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed, And batten on this moore ? ha ! have you eyes You cannot call it love , for at your age, The hev-day in the blood is tame, it's humble, And wai:s upon the judgment; and what judgment Would ftep from this to this? what devil. was't, That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman blind ? O shame where is thy blush rebellious hell, If thou canst mutiny in a matron's bones, To flaming youth let virtue be as wax, And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame, When the compulsive ardour gives the charge, Since froff it self as actively doth burn, And reason a pardons will.,tucer.. 0 .amiet, speak no more. Thou turn'ft mine eyes into my very foul,,And a or, panders,
And there I fee such 'black and gtained spots As will not leave their tins. ' . ,Ham. Nay,' iit. to live' : . : - ''i - . i... In the' rankfwea't 'of'ali incfttuous bed,'-: . . Stew'd' i' coi'ruption," ho'Aying aiid m tiilhg love ·:- i Over'fhe 1ai ft y. :' * '- :;.. .: .. ! :-:, ' Rueen. Oh speak no midre; ; i'. ' f:... Thefe-words like 'daggers 'enter'in -nine 'ars. ' ' No moi'e, sweet Hanmklet. ': . . Ham. A murderer, and a villain! A slave, that is not twentieth part the tythe Of your precedent lord. A vice of Kings, A cutpurse of the ciinire' and. the rule;: . . That from a shelf the precious; diadem iole . And put it in his:pociceti' '' . .: .. .,Enter Ghof. . A King of Ihreds and patches - ' -' Save.me,! and hover o'er me with your wings,.. [Starting up. You heav'nly guatds! what wqpuid your gracious figure ', §ueen. Alas he's mad.' . Ham. Do you not come your tardy 'Con to chide, ' ' That laps'd in ime. and paflion, lets 'g.by , . . TlI' importanttaing ofydu;dr,eadcommand ? O fay,'i Ghost. Do not foroet t'his visitation ' Is but to whet, thy alimof ,blurted plirpo.e. But look'! amazement on thy mother fits ; O siep between her and ler .fihtiig foul: Conceit in weakest bodies.ftrpngtlo ft works, Speak to her, Hamlet . . ' Hamn. How is it with you, ..lady Orueen. Alas, how is't with .you ' ' That thus y'ou bend your eye: on vacancy, And with. th' incorporal air do hold dircourfe) Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly' peep, And as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm, Your bedded hairs, t. like life in excrenients, t The hairs are excrtmentitious, that is, without lift: or sensation: yet those very hairs, as if they had life, lart u, C cc,. c. Start
Start up, and, sand .on cnd. O gentle.fon, Upon the heat and flame of thy diftemRcr. Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look,?,Ham. On him ! onahim '-lopk you how. pale.he.glares: His formand cauf conjoin'd, preachingto itnes, Would make them capable. Do not look on me, Left with this pitious ation.you convert. My stern effets : then:wbat.l have to do, ,Will want true colour; tears perchance for-blood.,Queen. To whom do you speak this i Ham. Do. you fee nothing there 2.,l[pointing t:othe .Ghft, Lemtn. Nothing atrall, yet.all.thatisI: ifce. Ham. Nori did you nothing..hear.. !Lueen. No, nothing but our, selves. Ham. Why look youthere ? look how it Lteals away! My father in his habit as he lived I Look where he goes ey'a now out at the-portal,,Exit Ghoe f: baS, This is the very coinage of your brain, This bodiless creation Eftafie Is very, cunnig in.,Ham. What ectafie ? My pulse, as yours, doth temp'rately kep time, And makes as healthful. mufick.: 'Tis not-madnefs That 1 have uter'd; bring me to the test' And I the matter will re-word; which miadnefs' Would gamboll from. Mother, for IQve of gracej Lay not that flattering unction to y.opr foul, That not your trefpals, but my madness speaks: It will but skin and, film the ulcerous place, Whiift rank corruption a running all within, Inse&s unseen. Confers.your' elf io heav'n, Repent what's paftl, voidrwhatis to come,. And do not fpread.the composs on the weeds To make them ranker, Forgive this my virtu;p For in the fatness of thfe.piirfie tirfesj Virtue it self of vice must pardon beg, Yea t.courb, andwoqoe,. for leave to-do it:good * miming, {dit. frim. t courb, tofloot or.bkd down,
_euen. Oh. H/mltr! thou,, haft, clef myr heart.'in twain. Ham. 0 throw away'.the worser pMrt, of ir, And live the purer'withl the other iaf.' Good night; but go not to mineuncle's bedi Altume a virtue, if you have it not. That monfler custom, who. all: sense do6th eat, Of habit's devil; is angel.yet in this; That to the use of ations fair and good, He likewise gives a frock or: livery That aptly is put on.: Refrain to-night, And that fliall lend'a kirdi of eafih'eTs. To the next abftlnence, the- nexrmore'eafie e' ; For use can almost chane .the fampof nature, And maser ev'n the.decvilf or thrw ihi- out ' With wondrous potency. Ohce-nimpre;good'ight!; And when you are deiious;to be:l : ' ft --- i'll blefling,begof you. Sot thisfameIlordi,[P^Wnt nsto ioL, I do repent: but heav'n ath pas-ditio, : :; : To punifli'me with this, aid,thflswitHnip': - That I must be their fohrge and miiiiftr.; I will bellow himn and'wi'anfwe' well : The death I gave hihi; f6 again, gpd: igt'; ' I must be crueil, only to be kind; Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.,fLueen. What shall I do //am, Nbt this by no neans..that I bid youdo; t Let the f6nd'Ring tem'iptyou again to-bedi,. Pinch.wanton.on your cheek, call you his mouse, And let him for a pair of'eechy ITes',- Or padling in your neck with his damn'd fingers, Make you to ravel all this matter out, That I esSentially --am notin, madness, But mad in craft. 'Twere good you,let him know. For who that's buta- Queen, fair, fober, wife,,Would f In the old edition it is, Let the blote King-- the 7o.Vrd'fignifies fond, or pusf'd up, or full-blooded, rc- borefufffiis, Skinner.
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gibbe, Such dear concernings hide ? who would do so No, in defpight of sense and secrecy, Unpeg the basket- on'the house's top, Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape To try conclusions, in the basket creep, And break your own neck down.,_ueen.. Be thou affur'd, if words be made Of.breath, And breath of life: I have no life to breathe What thou halt faid.to me.,Ham. I must to England, you know that ? Oueen. Alack, I had forgot; '.tis so concluded on. t Ham. There's letters fea['d, and.iny 'two school.,fellows, ( Whom I will trust as I.will adders fanig'd,) They bear the mandate; they miif fiweep my way And marshal me to knavery: let it work Tor 'tis the sport to have the engineer goift with his own petar: an't fall go hard But I will delve-one!yard.below their mines, And blow them at moon. 0 tis nioft sweet When in one line two crafts.diretly meet ! This man shall set me packing I'll lug the-guts into the Aeighbour room, lMother, good night. Irideed thiscounfellor Is now most fill, mofl secret, and hmoft grave, Who was in life a foolish prating knave. Come, Sir, to draw toward an end with you. Good night, mother. [Exit Hamlet, tuggingin Polonius.,t Tie ten following verfesi are added out of the old edit jon.,-' . . 'ACT',· . , -.~ . . ..,
AC T IV. SCENE I.,d Royal .Spartment. Enter Iing and eueen.,K I N G. I'.,'," Here's matter in these sighs; these pro- Bi~'* " '~'i bfound heaves,You must translate, 'tis. fit we under- I- stand them. Where is your son ? . . .......... Rcueen. Ah, my good lord, what have,I seen to-night Xing. What, Gertrude? how does Hamlet?,euten. Mad as the seas, and wind, when both con- tend Which is the mightier; in his lawless fit, Behind the arras hearing something ltir, He whips s s rapier out, and cries, a rat And in his brainish apprehension, kills The unseen good old man. KIing. 0 heavy deed ! It had been so with us, had we been there: His liberty is full of threats to all, To you your seif, to us, to every one, Alas', how shall this bloody deed be anfwer'd ? It will be laid to us, whose providence Should have kept fliort, reftrain'd, and out of haunt This mad young man. But so much was our love, We would not underlland what was molt fit; But:like the owner of a foul disease, To keep it from divulging, let it feed Ev'n on thle pith of:life.. Where is.he gone,Oueen. Pc.
6uecen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd, O'er whom his very madness, like some ore Among a mineral of metals base, Shews itself pure. He weeps for what is done.,King Oh Gertrude, come away: The fun no sooner mhall the mountains touch, But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed We mult, with all our majesty. and skill, Both countenance, and excuse. Ho ! Giildenfirn !,Enter Rofincrofe and Guildenftern. Friends both, go join you with some further aid: Iamic in madness hath Pclonius slain, And from his mother's closet hath he drag!d him. Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body Into the chappel. Pray you haste in this.,[Ex. Rof. andaGil, Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends, And.let them.know-both what we mean to do, And what's untimely done. Oh come away, Its foul is full of discord and d-imay. [ Exeunt.,SCEN E II.,Enter Hamlet. Ham. Safely sowed,-- Gentlemen within,. Halet ! lord HamWet! Ham. What noise ' who calls on 3amiet,? Oh here thev come.,F7nter Rofincroffe and Guildcnftern' Rof. What have you done, my lord, with the dead,body ' Ham. Compounded it.with duff, whereto 'tis kin. Rof. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence, And bear it to the chappel.,Ham. Do not believe:it. RSs. Believe-what, Ham. That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be demanded ofa.fpunge, what re- plication fhould.be made.by the.fon of a King ..,sos.
Ref. Take you me for a fpunge, my lord:? - Ham. Ay, Sir, that-fokes up the King's countenance, his rewards, his authorities; but fich officers do the King belt service in the end; he keeps them like b an apple in the corner of- his: jaw;. firfl.:mouth'd, to be last fwallow'd: when he needs what.you haveglean'd, it is but squeezing you, and fpunge, youtfhall be dry again.,Rof I understand younot, my lord.; Ham. I am glad of it, a knavilh)fpeech fleeps!in: a foolish ear.,Rofi My lord, yoi. muf' tell us. where the body: is, and go with us to the King., Ham. The body is with the King, but.the.King is not with the body.- The King is a thing-- Guild. A thing, my.lord ? Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him, hide fox, and:. all after. ['Exiunt.,S C E N E III.,Enter King King. I've fent.to seek him, and to find the bodyg How dang'rous is it that this mantgoes loose! Yet must not we put the strong law on him; He's lov'd of the diftraied multitude, Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes: And where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd, But never the offence. To bear all smooth, This.fudden fending him away, must seem Deliberate pause: diseases defp'rate grown, By desperate appliance are relieved, Or not at all.,Enter Rofincroffe. How now ? what hath befall'n ?,Rof. Where the dead body is beftow'd, my. lords We cannot get from him. King. But where is he ? Rof. Without, my lord, guarded to know. your,pleasure. King.
King. Bring him before us. RoJf Ho, G;ildenfiern ! bring in my lord.,Enter Hamlet and Guildenftern. King. Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius? Ham. At supper. King. At supper . where . Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certain convocation of politique worms are at him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat our selves for maggots. Your fat King and your lean beggar is but variable service, two dishes to one table, that's the end.,King. Alas, alas! Hamt. - A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a King, and cat of the fifl that hath fed of that worm.,King. What dolt thou mean by this ? Ham. Nothing but to Ihew you how a King may go a progress through the guts of a beggar. o King. Where is Polonius ?,Ham. In heav'n, fend thither to fee. If your met- fenger find him not there, seek him i'th' other place your self. But indeed, if you find him not this month, you shall nose him as you go up the flairs into the lobbey.,King. Go seek him there. Ham. He will flay 'till ve come. King. -Hai;nlet, this deed, for thine especial fafcty ( Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve For that which thou haft done ) muit fend thee hence With fiery quickness then prepare thy self, The bark is ready, and the wind at help, Th' associates tend, and every thing is bent For England.,Ham. For Entland King. Ay, Hamlet. Ham. Good. King. So is it, if thou knew'ft our purposes.,Hanm. . added from the old edl':
Ham. I fee a Cherub that fees them ; but come, for England! farewel, dear mother.,King. Thy loving father, Hamlet. Ham. My mother : father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is one flesh, and so my. mother. Come, for England. [. Exit.,King. Follow him at foot, tempt him with speed a.,board; Delay it not, I'll have him hence to-night. Away, for every thing is seal'd and done That else leans on th' affair; pray you make halle. And England ! if my love thou hold'ft at ought, As my great power thereof may give thee sense, Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red After the Danifli sword, and thy free awe. Pays homage to' us; thou may'st not .coldly i let Our sovereign process, which imports at full By letters b congruing to that effe&t,. The present death ofHamlet. Do it England: For like the he&ick in my blood he rages, And thou must cure me; 'till I know 'tis done, How-e'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin. [Exit.,S C E NE IV.,A CAMP. Enter Fortinbras with an army. For. ( 0, captain, from me, greet the DaniJi King,,Gj Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras Claims the conveyance of a promis'd march Over his realm. You know the rendevouz. If that his majeRfy would ought with.us, We Ihall express our duty in his eye, And let him know so.,Capt. I will do't, my lord. For. Go softly on. [Exit Fortinbras.,Enter tó let or t-t.,rdi,b conjmring
Enter Hamlet, Rofincr6ofe, cy. Ham. Good Sir, whose powers are these Capt. They are of Norway, Sir. Hamn. How c purpos'd Sir, I pray you? Capt. Against Come part of Poland. -Ham. Who. commands them, Sir? Capt. The nephew of old Norway, .Fortinbras Ham. Goes it:againfl the:main of Poland, -Sir, Or for some frontier .c'apt. Truly to speak it, and with no-addition, We go to gain a little patch of ground That hath-in it no profit but the-name. To pay five ducats, five I-would-not;farm it, Nor will it yield to' Nrway or'the Pole A ranker rate, should it be d fold-in fee.,Ham. '-Why then the -Poldckeever will defend it. Capt. Yes, 'tis already garrifon'd. Ham. Two tloufand fouls, and-twenty'thoufand,ducats Will not-debate the queffion.of this straw; This is th'impofthume of much wealth-and peace, That inward breaks, and shews no cause without 'Whythe man dies. I humbly-thank--you,-Sir.,Cap. God b'w'ye, Sir. Sos. Will't please you.go, my lord? Ham. I'll be with you, go a little before, [Exein;,,.Manet Hamlet. How all occasions do inform against me, ·-And spur my dull revenge ?; wat is a .man, If his chief good and market of' his time Be but to- sleep and feed ? a beast, no more. Sure he that made us with such large discourse, Looking before and after, gave us not That capability and god-like reason To rust in us unus'd. Now whether i:be Bestial oblivion, or some craven- scruple · Of thinking too precisely on th' event,,' prqos'~d d A(A C propos'd d - .
(A. thought which qtuarter'cd hath But one part.wifdom, And ever three parts coward:) I do not know Why yet .Ilive'to fay this'thing's toido, Sith I:;have:caufe, and' will, and:ftrength, -.and means *To do't. Examples.grofs as, earthexhort me; 'Witness this- army of such mass and charge, Led by a.'delicate and tender prince, Whofet'fpiritl with divine:ambition puft Makes mouths at the invisible event, Expofinca what is:iinortaliand 'unsure To all that fortune, death, and danger dare, Ev.'n for an egg-shell. :'Tis not to. be (great, Never, to' fiir' withouti great argument; But greatly to find quarrel, in-ialftraw, When honour's at:theitake. iHowsitand I then, That have a father kill'dj.a, mother ftain'd, (Excitements of my reifon aid my blood) A'nd 'let all'flneep,'*wliile 'o mjr hame: I ee The imminent death of'-twenty thoufand:mnen, That for a faitafie and-trick .of fame Go to their graves like beds, fight for a'fpot Whereon the numbers cainnot.try the cause, 'Which is not tomb enough and continent To hide:theflain'?'O thein from this time forth, My thoughts .be-blody,'or be nothing 'Worth',S C E N E V.,A Palace. Enter ti'en,' Horatio, 'and a Genfleman, gen. T Will not.fpeak with her.,1 -Gnt. She is',importunate, Indeed diltraft; her mood will needs-be pitied.,Oueen. What would'fhe have? Gent. She speaks much of her father; fays she hears There's tricks i'th' world, and 'hems, and beats-her heart, Spurns 'nviouly. at ftraws,.fpeaks things in doubt,That
That carry but half sense her speech is nothing, Yet the unfhaped use of it doth move The hearers to colle&ion; they aim at it, And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts, Which as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them, Indeed would make one think there might be thoughts Though nothing sure, vet much unhappily.,Ror. 'Twere good file were spoken. with, for flhe,may fiow . Danzerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds. Let ier come in,WOeen. To my sick foul, as fln's true nature is, Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss, So full of artless jealoufie is guilt, It spills it self in fearing to be spilt.,Enter Ophelia diflrabEed. Oph. Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark t /:een. How now, Ophelia ? Oph. How flJould I your true love know from another,ore ? hy his cackle hat and flaff, and his sandal lhoon.,[Singing, aueen. Alas, sweet lady; what imports this song oph. Say you? nay, pray.you mark. He's dead and gone, ladv, he is dead and gone, At his head a grafs-green turf, at his heels a flone.,Enter King. jcen. Nay, but Ophelia- Oph. Pray you mark. 'Lj'ite his fhrowd as the mountain snow. ecree;:. Alas, look here, my lord. Oph. Larded with sweet flowers:.,,which bewept to the grave did go, :.Sth true-love flowers. Xi:g. How do ve, pretty lady ? oh7. Well, God dil'd you. They fay the owl was 2 baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your table.,KXig.
King. Conceit upon her father. oph. Pray let us have no words of this; btt Wihen they ask you what it means, fay you this: To-morrow is St. Valentine's day, all in the morn betime, And I a maid at youir window, to be.your Valentine. Then up he rose, and don'd his cleaths, and dupt the,chamber-door; Lit in a maid, that out a maid never deptrted more. King. Pretty Ophelia! oph. Indeed ? without an oath, I'll make an end on't,By Gis, and by S. Charity;,Alack, ,and fie for shame, :onng men will do't, if they come to't,,By cock they are to blame. ttioth Jfie, before you tumbltd me, ' You promis'd me to wed: So would I ha' done, by yonder fun,,And thou hadfl not come to my bed. King. How long hath she been thus . oph. I hope all will be well. We muff be patient, but I cannot chuie but weep, to think they flould lay him i'th' cold ground; my brother flall know of it, and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my coach; good-night, ladies; good-night, sweet la- dies; good-night, good-night. [Exit. King. Follow her close, give her good watch, t,pray you, This is the poison of deep grief, it springs All from her father's death. 0 Gertrude, Gertrude! When sorrows come, they come not single spies, But in battalions. Firfl, her father slain, Next your son gone, and he most violent authoe Of his own jufl remove, the people muddied, Thick and unwholfome in their thoughts and whispers, For good Polonirus' death. We've done but greenly, In private to inter him ; poor Ophelia Divided from her self, and her fair judgment, (Without the which we're pictures, or mere beafs )' Lnft, and as much containing as all thece, Her brother is in sec'et come from 'Fance, Yo L. VIII. N Feads
Feeds on this wonder, keeps himself in clouds, And wants not buzzers to insea his ear With peflilent speeches of his father's death Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd, Will nothing stick our persons to arraign In ear and ear. 0 'my dear Gertrude, this, Like to a murdering piece in many places, Gives me fupertluous death [; A N/oise within,S C E N E VI.,Enter a AlMeJlner. King. Where are t'y sw:itzers? let them guard the,door. What is the matter ?,-.':e Save your self, -my lord. The ocean over-peering of his lift Eats not the flats with nlore impetuous haste, Than young Laertes, in a riotous head, O'er-bears your officers; the rabble call him lord, And as the world were now but to begin, Antiqu:- fo;rgot, custom not knowrr, The ratifiers and props of every word; They cry, chute we Laertes for our King. Caps, Iands, and tongues, applaud it to the Clouds, I aertes hall be Kin,, Laertes King.,-cen. How& chearfully on the faife trail they cry, Oh this is counter, you false Danifi dogs.,[Noifc witthi, Er:er Laertes. Kirg. The doors are broke. Larr. h'nere is the King ? Sirs : stand you all with. ,Ai. No, let's come in. [out L.eir. 1 pray you give me leave. Ail. We will, we will. Iaer. 1 thank you; keep the door. O thou vile King, give me my father.,c,:een. Calmly, good Laertes. Latr. That drop of blood that's calit, proclaims me,balsard,,Crys
Crys cuckold to my father, brands the harlot Even here between the chaste and unfmich'd brow Of my true mother.,King. What is the cause, Laertes, That thy rebellion looks so giant-like? Let him go, Gertrude do not fear our person: There's such divinity doth hedge a King That treason can but peep to what it would, Ads little of its will. Tell me, Laertes, Why are you thus incenft i Let him go, Gertrude, Speak man.,Laer. Where is my father ? King. Dead.,Been. But not by him. King. Let him demand his fill. Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with, To hell, allegiance ! vows, to the black devil ! Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit; I dare damnation; to this point 1 fland, That both the worlds I give to negligence, Let come what comes; only I'll be reveng'd Miolt throughly for. my father.,King. Who Ihall flay you' Laer, My will, :not all the world's. And for my means, I'll husband them so well, They shall go far with little. King. Good Laertes: If you desire to know the certainty Of your dear father's death, in your revenge, (That sweep-stake,) you will draw both friend and fae, Winner and loser. Laer. None but his enemies. King. Will you know them then ? Laer. To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms, And like the kind life-rendring pelican, Repast them with my blood.,King. Why now you speak Like a good child, and a true gentleman. That I am guiltless of your father's death, And am mosi sensibly in grief for it,,N 2z It
It shall as level to your judgment pierce, As day does to your eye. [A Noise within,,S C E N E VII. Enter Ophelia fantafically drefj with firaws and,flowers. Laer. Let her come in. How now what noifc is,that i O heat dnr up my brains, tears seven times salt Burn out the sense and vertue of mine eye. Pv heav'n, thv madness shall be paid with weiht, 'till our scale turn the beam. O rose of Maly Dear maid, kind sifter, fveet Ophtlia! O heav'ns, is't possible a young maid's wits Should be as mortal as an old man's life? a Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine, I; fends some precious instance of it self kfter the thing it loves. Oph. They bore him bare-fac'd on the b;er,,And on his grave rains many a tear, Fare yio! well, my dcve. Latr. Hadst thou thy wits, and didRt perfwade re. \enze, it could not move thus.,cith. You must fin, down a-down, and you call linm a-down-a. O how the wheel becomes it? it is the false fieward that stole his master's daughter.,Latr. This nothing's more than matter. ovh. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance; pray love remember s and there's pancies, that's for thoughts.,Laer. A document in madness, thoughts and re- membrance fitted.,oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines; there's rue for you, and here's some for me. We may call,it * Or, perhaps,,.at:re is ire in love, and where 'tis fire t1 fends fotne trecious incenfi of itself After the thhin it loves.
it herb of grace a Sundays: you may wear your rile with a.difference. There's a dafie; I would give you some violets, but they withered all when my father dy'd: they fay, he made a good end;,For bonny fyveet Robin is all my jay. Laer. Thought, and affietion, passion, hell it feWs She turns to favour,'aand to prettiness.,Oph. And will he not come again a,And will hi not come again ? No, no, he is dead, go to thy death-bed, He never will come again. His beard as white as snow, All flaxen was his pole: He is gone, he is gone,, and'wce cajl away monW, Gramercy on his foul. And of all christian fouls ! God b'w'ye. [Exit Opheli, Laer.. Do you fee this, you'Gods? King. Laertes, I must commune with your grief, Or you deny me right: go but a-part, Make choice of whom your wifelt friends you will, And they .hall hear and judgT 'twixt you and me;. If by dire&.orb) collateral'lhand They find us touchl',. we will our kingdom give, Our crown,, our life, and all that we call ours To you in'fatisfafion. But if not, Be you content to lend your patience to us, And we ]hall jointly labour with .your foul, To give it due content.,Laer. Let this be so. His means of death, his obscure fineral; No trophy sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones, No noble rite, nor formal ostentation; Cr' to be heard, as 'twere from heav'n to earth,. That I muit call in question.,King, So you shall: And where th'offence is, let the great ax fall. 1 pray you go with me. [Exeunt.,N 5;,.SCENE
SCENE VIII. 6 Enter Horatio, with an attendant. .fr.XLw HAT are they that would speak with me',Sr, Sailors, Sir, they fay they have let.,ters for you. iFr. Let them come in. I do not know from what part of the world 1 fiould be greeted, if not from lord Hamlet.,Enter Sailors. Sail. God b!ess you, Sir. Her. Let him bless thee too. Sail. He Ihall, Sir, a'nt please him. There's a lIc. ter for you, Sir: It comes from th' ambassador that was bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I sm let to know it is.,Hor. reads the letter. H OR AT 10, wke ti;ho flialt have tverlool'd this,,give theif fellows for;e means to the King: they hav- letters for him. Ere we were tto days old at,pea, a pirate cf very warlike appointmeht gave us chacrt Finding sourfelves too flow of fail, wteput on a tompelled -,vaour, and in the rapfle I bearded themn: on the infant they got cdear of o:.r lip, so I alone became their prifs. ier. They have dealt with ne, like thirves of mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to do a rood turn far them. Let the King haze the letters I havs stint, and repair thoe: to me wzith as tnuch hRft as thoru rwooidcfi fly death. I have wocrds to fpea'. in thy ear, w-ll mnake tiel dumb, yet are they much too light for the ,hater. Whefe goed fellows wili brine thee zwhere I am. Rosin- crosse and Guildenflern hold their 'course for England, Of them I hKAve mnttch to tell thee, fartwel.,He that tlhou) knowefi thine, Hamlet.,Conic, _ ____
Come, I will make you way for these your letters, And do'r the speedier, that you may dire&t me To him from whom you brought them. [Exent,.,SCENE IX. Enter King, and Laertes. xing. 0 W mrutft your conscience my acquittance,N (eal,. And you must put me in your heart for friend, Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, That he which hath your noble father slain, Pursued my life. Laer. It well appears. But tell me, Why you proceeded-not against these feats, So criimeftil and so capital in nature, As by your tafety, wisdom, all things else, You mainly were stirr'd up.,King, Two special reasons, Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unfinew'd, And yet to me are strong The Queen, his mother, Lives almost by his looks; and for my self, My virtue or my plague, be't either which, She's so conjunciye to my life and foul That as the flar moves not but in his fpllere, I could not but by her. The other motive, Why to a publick count I might not go, Is the great love the general gender bear him; Who dipping all his faults in their affetion, Would, like the spring that turneth wood to {tone, Convert his gyves to graces. So my arrows Too fliihtly tlmbred for so loud a wind, Would have reverted to my bow again, And not where } hd aiin'd them. Laer. And so have I a noble father loft, A ilfter driven into desperate terms, Whose worth, if praises may go back again, Stood ciallenger on mount of all the age Tor her perfections - But revenge will come.,N 4 K'ni»
Kin:. Break not your sleeps for that, you mut not,think That we are made of ftuff-fo flat and dull, That we can let our beard be shook with danger, And think it paltime. You Ihall soon hear more. 1 lov'd your father, and we love your self, And that I hope will teach you to imagine ..,,Enter Messenger. _ej't. These to your Majesty: this to the Queen. Kir., From Hamlet ? who brought them ? MA'es Sailors, my lord, they fay, I saw them not: They were given me by Claudio, hq receiv'd them.,XinS. Laertes, you ffall hear them: leave us, all -,[Exit MAle i.gh ead mrts.giy, youJ l'a!! know I am set naked ea yeur kingdcm. To-morrow flJall I beg leave to fee yOUF kinly eyes. When I Jflall, frft asking youpardon tkhi- anto, reesnrt tin' occasion of my sudden return.,Hamlet, YKWhat mould this mean . are all the reft come back i Or is it some abuse- and no such thing ia.r. Know you the hand? King. 'Tis. Hamlet's chara&er; Ninked, and (in a postscript here, he fays) Alone: can you advise me,Laer. I'm loft in it, my lord:; but let hilm core, It warms tie very sickness in my heart, That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, Thus diddeft thou.,Kinf. If it be so, Laertes, As how flhculd it be so - how otherwise rr Will you be rul'd by me .,Laer. I, so you'll not o'er-rule me to a peace. Kin-. To- tline own peace: if he be now return'J, As liking not his voyage, and that he means No mrore to undertake it; I will work him To an exploit now ripe in my device, tn:isr :lih wvlich he halU not chufe, but fall:
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe, But ev'n his mother shall uncharge the:-pra&ice, And call it accident.,Laer. I will be rul'd,. . The rather if you coiuld devise- it so- That I might be the iiitrumeht,,King. ;It falls right: .. You have been taikt.:of fnce your travel muchr And that in Hamlet's hearing,. for a quality Wherein they fay you lhine; your fum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him,, As did that one, and that in my regard Of the unworthiet. siege.,Laer. What part is that,.my lord King. A very feather in the cap. of youth,. Yet needfultoo, .for youth no lets becomes The light and iarelefs livery that it wears,- Than fettled age his fables, and his weeds,. Importing hearth and graveness. Two months since Here was a gentleman of Normandy ;. I've seen my self and serv'd against the French, And they can well on horse-back.; but this gallant. Had witchcraft in't; he grew unto his feat; And t such wondrous doing brought his horse, As he had been incorps'd and demy-natur'd With the brave. beast; so far he past my thought;. That I in forgery of shapes and tricks, Come ihort of what he did,,I:aer; A Norman was't ? ,King. A- Norman.. Laer. Upon my.life, Lamona, King. The very fame. Lner. I know him well, heis the.broorcindeed, And gem of all the nation,,King. He made confeflion of you, And gave you such a masterly report, For art and exercise inr your defence-; And for your rapier most especial, That he cry'd.out, 'twould be a fight.indeed,,N-5 .I
If one could match you. This report of his Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy, That he could nothing do, but wiih and beg Your sudden coming o'er to play with him.,Row out of this - Laer. What out of this, my lord :. I;rn:. Laertes, was your father-dear to you :. Or are you like tlie painting of a sorrows A fLce without- a heart,Laer. Why ask you this - King. Not that I think you did not loye yoa father, But that I know love is begun by time; And that I fee in paflages of proof, Time qualifies the spark ald fire of it: There lives within the very flame of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it, . And nothing is at a like goodness still; For ooodnefs growing to a pleurifie, Dies in his own too much; what-wewould d,. We fnould do when we would i for this would cange And hath abatements and delavs as many As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents, Ard then this flJouId is like a spend-thrift's sigh That hurts by easing; but to th' quick 'o'th' ulcert-. I.miilet comes back what would you .undertake To tr.ew your self your father's son indeed5 More than in words,Larr. To cut his throat i'th' church. Kin-. No place indeed should murtherTfanffuarite, Revenoe should have no bounds; but, good Laertns, Will you do this, keep close within your chambert Hamlet return'd, shall know you are-come home.: We'll put on those f.all praise your excellence, And set a double varnisn on the fame The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together, And wager on your heads. Hz being remiss, Most generous, and'free from all contriving, Will :ot peruse the foils; Co that with ease, Or. with a little shuffling, you may chufe,A sword
A fwprd. t unbated, and in.a pass of.pralice Requite hin) for you father.,Laer. I will do't. ' ' - " And for the purp fe. I'll ,inolPt y sword: I bought ain uptoii' 9f, a mopintelank, So mortal, tl.t bdu dip a knite in it, Where ji d.iayy blood'd, no catapafl so rare, Collectd from alZlipls that have virtue Ulnder the moop, fcapfa'e the thing from deatli That is but Acratchl'd withal; I'll 6tich m), poinr With thi6'.cntagipto .i.f I gll. hi .slightly It may' .e diath. King. Let's farther think of this, Weigh what convegicr.e .b.oth of ,timre and means May fit us to our fhalpe. If.this fhoul f ail, And that .o,ur drift look .tliro.ub our bad performance; 'Twere better.no.t afray'd the.reffire .this projef Should have a1ack, g f.e.ond,. that might hold, If this .tould blast in prof. .Soft -.let me fee-- Well make a folenii w.er on your 'cunnings, I ha't - when in y9.our notio.n you are hot, And make your bouts mor.e .io.lent to th' end, And that he calls for drink; I'll hav.e prepar'd him A chalice forthee nonce ;j h,ereon'but sipping, If he by chanc cr.ce .yo.ur yvnom'd tuck, Qarp[uiofe miy'libid th'ere HowAow, .fwoet Q..ueen ?,C E N E X.,Enter 9ceen. Geun. One woe doth tread upon another's heel, So fast they follow :. your fiter's drown'd, Laertes,,Laer. Drown'd! oh where ? geen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shews his hoar leaves in the glaflie itream: There with fantaflick garlands did she come, Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisics, and long purplcs That liberal Ihepherds give a grosser name,,But. t Thatis, not blunted, asfoyles are. Or0r'es.ve edi- sion :has it, embaited or ennenomed,
But our cold maids do dead mens fingers call them. There on the pendant boughs, her coronet weeds Clambring to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and her- self Fell in the weeping brook; her doaths fpread'wide, And mermaid-like, a while they bore her up; Which time Ihe chaunted fnatches.of. old tunes, As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native, and indewed Unto that element: but long it could not be,. 'Till that her Garments, heavy with their drink; Pull'd the poor wretch fromn her melodious lay To n'uddy death.,Laer, Alas then, she is drown'd!. ,!teen. Drown'd, drown'd. Laer. Too much of water haft'-thou, poo Opk elpl. And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet It is our trick, nature her cutom'holds, Let shame fay wha. it will; when these aregone, The woman will-be out: adieu, my lord; I have a speech of fire that fain would blaze, lBt that this folly drowns it, . [Exit Kins. Follow, Gertrude : How much had I to do to calm his rage? olow fear I, this will give it ftartagaio, Therefore let's follow. [Ex t;,. . -,. .,A.G '
AC T V. S C E N EL,A CHURH.UR i.C Knter two clewns,. with spades and mattotks'.,'I CLOWN. , . S she to be buried -in christian burialt,that willfully seeks hei'ro.ni salvation ! ' z2 Ciin;' telli the, sihe- is: there- fore maKe her gravi itraight, the c'roWner hat.h 'fate on-her, and finds.it chrifian burial.,,r cliwn. How: can that be, unless. she drowned her self in her own defence,a Clown. Why 'tis found so. : iClown.. It mull be fe offeendenhd, it cannot be else;. Tor here lyes the; point if.I'drown-mn ielf witting- ly, it argues an aa& and an a& hath three branches. It is to a&, to do, and to perform ;s argal, Phe drown'&c her self wittingly,,2 Clown. Nay, but hear you, goodman Dehver.: I Clown. Give me leave; here lyes the water, good:. here fiands the man, good: if the man go to this wa- ter, and.drown himself; it is will he, nill he, he goes; mark you that: but if the water come. to him, and drown him; he drowns not himnfelf. Argl,. he that is not guilty of his own death, ihortens not his own- life. ...,2 Clown. But is this law? l Clown. Ay marry is't, crowner's quelt law;. 2 Clown. Will you ha' the truth on't if this had not been a gentlewoman, she ihould haye been buried out of chift ian burial,.,.Clowt,.
I Clwx. Why there thou fay'R. And the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this wTrli to Rown or han themfdeves, ~oe tian othaer chrifiaBS. - Come, my spade tiere is no ancient gen- tlemenbut gardeners, ditchers and grave-makers; they hold-up Adam's pilfefion,: ' .,i -Clot. Was ite a geinlemarn i Ciov-n. He was the firit that ever bore arms. 2. Clown. Why, -ie'ihid n&ne. - 1 Clawn. What, art a heathen? how dofl thou un- derltand thefcripture. the scripture fays,' Adam digg'd; could he dig without arms ! I'll put another queltion to thee; if thou anfwereftme-not to the purpose, con- fess thy self-.,dcw;A,. Go to. a Cldtwn. What .i he diat butilds stronger than ei- ther the mason, :the Ihip-wright, or tde carpenter,a Cvwn. The gallows.-maker, for that frame out- lives a thousand tenants.,-r C n.w I like thy wit well in good faith, the gal- lows well; but how -does it weall, rt does well ,to those that do ill: now thoudof ill to fay thegallaws is -built ftronge haan the church argl, the gallows may do well to-thee. TDht againj come.,2. Cevwn.. Whobuilds stronger-than.a maiaam a ship- wright, lor a carpenter -,I Clown. Av, tell me that, and unyoke; 2 Cl.;wn. Marry, now . can tell. - DClo-w. To't. a.CIolwn. Mafit, I cannot tell.,Enter Hamlet and Horatio at .a Sflancr. i Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it; for your dull ass will not-mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this question next, fay a grave- maker. The houses he makes, last 'till dooms-day go, get thee rowJoghan, feyh mne a fioup of liquor.,! '[Eit :.lown.,J'fe
He digs and sings. In youth when 1 did love, did Iv4,e,,Methough ii. was very, feet;. ' To contrat .oh 'te tit fcSr. a. my behove,,oh methought there 'as nothing meet. Gasm. ias: this -felIwt no. -feeeng:'of ,his biinefs, tht;hl e .sings atigtiv,~:iBiei **in .. -. ". .-,Hor.. CtlRotio ihath ,made it to: hini .a aprqpert oE eafrinefs.: , . . .. . . .. , .,Ham. 'Tis ·e'en.ifo .lhe, and of ,little iniplomeag hhth e.dAtieir sense. , .,.:- i,- . ,. ' Clown A.ngs.,:: ' ': iitt a he& ,tbs, i, fleding ijkp,,.. d-. ih alihu.t :c ,in. eluth ' - '- ~a'ad ·hatbh Jhipped mctinto ,the.at rti*,.hsis .I m'er -had. betn fich. *Ham. that scull had a tongue in ih, and could';.ih- oace; li6w the knave jowles it to the ground, as ifc- were Cain's jaw-bone, that did th 'iiffltmurther! ilits might be the .pate of a politician 'wliich this asS t.o'er- offices; one that could circumvetet'G ibd mih'it riot,IHor. It miiht,. my lord.. Ham. Or of a cdurtier, which could fay, good- morrow Tweet lord how dost thou,.g od lord: thi's might be my lord such a one, that prais'd my lorl' such a ones horse, when he menant tb'beg it3 might it not . ',Hor. Ay, my lord. . Him: ',Why e'erl so:: and now :iy lady Worm's, hloplefs, and knockt .bout the mazzard with a sex- ton's spade. Here's a fine revolution, if we had the -trick to fee't. Did there bones cost no more tihe breeding, but to play at loggers with 'em. .mine ake to think on't.,t In one edition o'erreaches,.
Clown sings. 5A itck-axe and a spade, a spade; .,For andi, a jhrosding sheet ! 0, a -pit of-clay, fir to be made,Forfuchb a gaue is meet; Iam. There's' another: why may not that be the scull of a lawyer' where be his quiddits now ? his quillets . his cafes . his tenures, and his trickss why does he susser this rude knave now to knock him a. bout the sconce with a dirty Ihovel, and will not tell him of his ation of battery ? hum! this fellownmight be in's time a-great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines, and the re- covery of his recoveries, to have hi& fine pate full of fine dirt will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of. a pair. of indentures the very conveyances of his lands ivil hardly lye in this box; and muftthe inheritor himself have no more . ha ?,fHor. Not a jot more, my lord. ' Ham. Is not parchment made of sheep-skins ?- oFr. Ay my lord, and of calve-skins too. ' Ham. They are Iheep and'calves that seek out aflu. -rance in that. I will speak to this fellow: WhoTe. grave's this, frrrat .-',Clown. Mine, Sir-,0, a pit of clay for to be made,.,For f:'ch a ghofl is meet. Ham. I think it be-thine indeed; for thou lielfin't. Chtv'n. You lie out on't, Sir, and therefore it is not yours; for my- part I do' not.lie in't, yet it is mine.:,Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in'r; and- fay 'tri thine; 'tis for the dead, not for. the quick, therefore thou ly'ft.,Cr-avn. 'Tis a quick lie, Sir, 'twill away again from me to you. -,1Haml
Ham. What man doff thou dig it for Clown. For no man, Sir. Ham. What woman then? Clown. For none neithei. Ham. Who is to be buried in't Clown. One that was a woman, Sir; btt reft her foul, Ihe's dead.,Ham. How absolute the knave is we munt speak by the card, or equivocation will follow us. By the lord, Horatio, there three years I have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked, that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of our courtier, he galls hi' kibe. How long haft thou been a grave-maker ?,Clown. Of all the days i'th' year, I came to't that day thar-our last King Hamlet o'ercame Fortinbras.,Ham. How long is that fnce Clown. Cannot you tell that ? every fool can tell that: it was that very day that young Hamlet was born; he that was mad, and sent to England,,Ham, Ay marry, why was he sent into England? Clown. Why, because he was mad; he shall reco. ver his wits there 3 or if he do not, it's no great mat- ter there,,Ham. Why? Clown. 'Twill not be seen in hiln, there the men are as mad as he.,Ham. How came he mad? Clown. Very strangely, they fay. Ham. How strangely ! Clown. Faith e'en with losing his wits. Ham. Uipon what ground b Clown. Why,, here in Denmark. I have been sex. ton here, man and boy, thirty years.,Ham. How longwill a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot ? Clown. 'faith, if he be not rotten before liedie, (as we have many pocky coarses now-a-days, that will, scarce hold the laying in) he will last you tome eight year, or nine year; a tanner will last you nineyears..,Ham. Why he, more than another .,Clown..
Clown. Why Sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while. And your water is a fore decayer 'of your whorfon dead body. Here's a scull now has lain in the earth three and twenty years.,.am. Whose was it ? Ckwn. A whorfon mad fellow's it was; whose do you think it was i,Ham. Nay, I know not. Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue, he pour'd a flagon of rhenish on my head once. This fame scull, Sir, was Torick's scull, the King's jester.,I-im. This ' Clowna. E'en that. Ia,.m. Alas poor TCrick! I knew him, Horatio, a fel- low of infinite jell; of most excellent fancy: he hath born me on his back a thousand times: and now how abhorred in my imagination it is ' my gorge rites at it. Here hung those lips that I have kifs'a I know not how cfr. Where be your gibes now ? your ,am- bols? your songs ? our aflaEes of merriment that were wont to set the table in a roar? not one now, to mock your own grinning ? quite chop-fallen! cow get you to my lady's chamber, and tell her, let her pain: an inch thick, to this favour she nuft come; make her laugh at that-- Pr'ythee, Horatio, tell me one thina.,arW. What's that, my lotd Ior. Dost thou think Alexander look'd o' this fa. frion i't'l earth ?,eir. E'en so. armx. And fielt so, puh [SmellinS to ite $cull. Hsr. E'en so, my lord. Hamn. To what base uses we may return, Horatio! why mav not imagination trace the noble dnft of A- ltxandtr, 'till he find it ilopping a bung-hole !,Htr. 'Twere to confider too curiously, to confi- der so.,Hamn. No faith, not a jot. But to follow him thi- ther with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it;,as
307 as thus: Alexander died,- Alexander' was ,,bilrid, A- lexander returneth to dust; the dust is earth' of earth we make lorme, and why of that lorne whereto he wao converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel Imperial C¢far dead and turn'd to clay, Might flop a hole to keep the wind away: Oh1, that that-earth, which kept the w6rld in we, - Should patch a wall, t' expel thle winter's aw ! But soft ! but soft a while- hee conies tle King,,S C E N E II. Enter King, qLuan, Laertes, and a cffln; jifh Lords,and Priefis attendant. The Queen, the courtiers. What is that they' folloxy And with fiich maimed rites this doth betoken, The co:rse they follovw did-with desperate hand Fore-do its own life; 'twas of some estate. Couch we'a while,' and mark. Laer. What ceremony else ? Ham. That is Laertes, a most noble youth: mark- Laer. W hat ceremony else e Priefi. Her obsequies have been as far eulara'd As we have warranty';:.her death was doubtfil,. And but that great command o'er-fways the ordei'. She lhould in.ground unfan&ified have lodg'd 'Till the la 'truinp. For charitable prayers, Shards, flints, and pebbles, should be thrown on her 3 Yet here Ihe is allow'd her virlin rites,; Her maiden strewments, and tie bringing home Of bell and burial.,Laer, Muft.no more be' done f ri'kj,. No Ioie. be done.:. - We lhould propliaihe tlie fervic of the d ead,' To sing a Req rimi, and fuci r.eft-to her As to peace-parted fouls. ' .' -,Laer. Lay her i'th' earth, And froio her fair and unpolluted flefli May ¥iolets fprino! I tell thee, churlish priel, A minifiring angel Ihall in]y fiftl bte,',When
When thou lieft howling.,Ham. What, the fair ophelia! Queen. Sweets to the sweet, farewel! tI hop'd thou would'st have been my Hamlet's wife; I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid, And not have ftrewd thy grave.,Laer. 0 treble woe Fall tentimes treble on that cursed head, Whose wicked deed thy moll ingenious sense Depriv'd thee of." Hold off the earth a while, Till I have caught her once more in.my arms,,[ Laertes leaps into the gratve Now pile your dust upon the qiiick and dead, 'Till of this flat a mountain you have made, T' o'er-top old Pelin, or the skyitl head Of blue Olympus.,Hdam. [difoierief hinfelf.] What is he, whose,griefs Bear such an emphasis whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandrin' stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers ? this is I,,[ Hamlet leaps into the grave Hamlet the Dane.,Laer. The devil take thy foul ! [Grapplin with him. Ham. Thou pray'ft not well. I pi'vthee take thy fingers from my throat For though I am not fplenative and ralh, Yet have I in me something dangerous, Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.,King. Pluck them asunder- ltcn. Hamlet, Hamlet- BHr. Good my lord be quiet.,[The attendants part them: Ham. Why, T will fight with him upon this theme, Until my eye-lids will no longer wag.,ueetn. Oh my son! what theme . Ham. I lov'd Ophelia; forty thousand brothers Could not with all their quantity of love Make up my fum. What wilt thou do for her .,King. 0 be is mad, Larrtts.
queen. For love of God forbear him. Ham. Come shew me what thou'lt do. Woo't weep woo't fight ? woo't fast ? woo't tear,thy felt Woo't drink up Efill;eat a crocodile? 'll do't. Do'.f thou come hither but to whine; To out-face me with leaping in her grave i Be buried: quick with 'her; -and so will I; And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, 'till our ground Sindging his pate againlt the burning zone, Make Ofa like a wart ! nay, an thou'lt mouth, I'll rant as well as thou.,King. Thii'is isiere madners; And thus a while the fit will work on him: Anon as patient as the female dove, When tlat her golden cuplets are difclos'd, His silence will fit drooping.,Ham. Hear you Sir-- What is the reason that you use me thus. I lov'd you ever; but it is no matter , Let Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew, and dog will have his day. [Exit,,King. I pray you good Horatio, wait upon him.,[Exit Hor. Strengthen your patience in our last night's. speech.,[ To Laertes. We'll put the matter to the present push. Good Gertrude set some watch over your son, This grave ihall have a living mcnument. An hour of quiet shortly shall we fee; 'Till then, in patience our proceeding be. [Exewat.,·¢~,SCENE i" --
S C E N E III.,A HALL. Enter Hamlet and Ioratio: Ham. Q O much for this, now hall you fee the,0 other. You do remember all the circurntance.,Hor. Remember it, my lord . Ham. Sir, in my heart thel e was a kind of fighting, That would not let me sleep; methought I lay Worse than the mutineers in .ilboes rainefs ( And prais'd be rashness for it) lets us know Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well,. When our deep 'plotsdo fail; and that should teach us, There's a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will.,.er. That-is most certain. iHam. Up from my cabin, My fea-gown fcarft about me, in the dark Grop'd I to'find out them; .had .my desire, Singer'd their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again, making fo'bold- ( My fears-forgetting imanners- .to unreal Their grand commiflion, where I found, Horatio, A royal knavery; an exac-command, Larded with mawT several forts of reasons, Importing Doftmar,'s health, and England's too, ( ;ith ho ! ilch.:buggs and-goblings in:my life,) That ontthe fiperviSe, no leifure-bated, No not to flay the grinding of the ax, My head should be itruck off.,Hor. Is't poflible ? Ham. Here's the commniflion, read it at more leisure 3ut wilt thou hear now how I did proceed ?,Hor. I beseech you. .am. Being thus benetted round with villains, Ere I could make a prologue to my brains,,'1 ~ !'*~ 'T h e y
They had begun the play. I fate me down, Devis'd a new commiflion, wrote it fair: (I once did hold it as our statists do, A baseness to write fair; and labour'd much How to forget that learning but, Sir, hlow It did me yeoman's service ) wilt-thldi know Th' effe& of what I.wrote ' .,Hor. Ay, good my lord. Ham. An earnest conjuration froin the King, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them'like the palm might flourilh, As peace ihould still her wheaten garland wear, And stand a comma 'tween their amities, And many such like Ai's of great cliarge That on the view and knowing these contents, Without debarenent further, mlore or less, He [hould the bearers put to sudden death, No hlriving time allbw'd.,Hor. How was this seal'd . Ham. Why ev'n in that was heaven ordinant I had my father's signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danifi feal: 1 folded the writ up in form of th' other, Subfcrib'd it, gave th' impression, plac'd'it :faely, The change Was' never known: 'now, the next day Was our fea-fight, and what to this was sequent, Thou know'ft already,Hor. So, Guildenflern and Rofittrqjfe go to't. Ham. They are not near my conscience; their dcfcAt Doth by their own insinuation grow: 'Tis dangerous when baser nature comes Between the pass, and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.,Hor. Why, what a King is this ? Ham. Does it not, think's thou,ftand me now. upon ? He that hath kill'd my King, and whor'd my mother, Popt in between th' ele&ion and my hopes, Thrownt ott his angle for my proper life, 'And wit uh uch cozenage; is't not perse& conscience, To quit him with this arm and is't not to be damn'd, To let this canker of our nature conic In -
In further evil,Her. It must be [hortly known to him from England. What is the iflue of the butinefs there.,Ham. It will be short. The Interim's iine, and a man's life's no more Than to fay, one. But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot my self; For by the image of my cause I fee The pourtraiture of his; I'll court his favours t But sure the bravery of his grief did put mc Into a towring palfion.,HIr, Peace, who comes here,SCENE IV.,Enter Ofrick. Ofr. Your lordship is riglt welcome back to Denmark. Harn. I humbly thank you, Sir. Dost know this water-fly ?,Her. No, my good lord. Ham. Thy itate is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to know him: he hath much land, and fertile; let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the King's mefTe; 'tis a chough ; but as I fay, spacious in the polfeflion of dirt.,cfr. Sweet lord, if your I lordftip were at leisure, I fkouid impart a thing to you from his majesty.,'Ham. I will receive it with all .diligence. of fpir; pFt your bonnet to his right use, 'tis for the head.,Cfr. I thank your lordthip, 'tis very hot. .iam. No, believe me, 'tis very cold, the wind is northerly.,Ofr. it is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed. Ham. Me:hinks it is very sultry, and hot for my complexion.,Ofr. Exceedingly, my lord, it is very sultry, as 'twere, I cannot tell hov;: -- 'ly lord, ris majesty,: , '* "bis ' frw.iilki . : . .. !
bid me fignifie to you, that he has laid a great wager on your head : Sir, this is the matter - Ham. 1 beseech you remember - ofr. Nay in good faith, for mine cafe in good faith: Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at his weapon.,Ham. What's his weapon ? ofr. Rapier and dagger. Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well. Ofr. The Kina, Sir, has wat'd with him fix Bar- 'ary horses, against the which ne impon'd, as I take it, fix French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, or so: three of the carriages in faith are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, nuft delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.,H.am. What call yon the carriages O/r. The carriages, Sir, arc the hangers. Ham. The phrase would be more germane to. the matter, if we could carry cannon by our fides; I would it might be hangers 'till then. But on; fix Barbary horses, against fix French swords, their as- signs, and three liberal-conceited carriages, that's the Trench bett against the Danijfi why is this iumpon'd, as you call it,Ofr. The King, Sir, hath laid, that in a dozen pas- fes between you and him, he fiall not exceed yto three hits; he hath laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate tryal, if your lordship would vouch- safe the andwer.,Ham. How if I answer no ? ofr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your per" son in trval.,Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall; if it please his maieftv, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if not, I'll gain nothing but my flune, and the odd hits.,ofr. Shall I deliver you so ? V o . VIlI. 0 H.i.n
Ham. To this effect, Sir, after what floirilh your nature will.,ofr. I commend my duty to your lordship. [Exit. Ham. Yours, yours5 he does well to commend it himself, there are no tongues elie for's turn.,Hor. This lapwing runs away with the Ihell on his head.,Ham. He did so with his dug before he fuck'd it: thus has he (and many more of the fame a breed that I know the drofly age dotes on) only got the tune of the time, and outward habit of encounter, a kind of vefty collecion, which carries them through and through the moos fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their tryals, the bubbles are out.,Enter a lord. Lord. My lord, his majetly commended him to you by young Ofrick, who brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall; he fends to know if your plea. sure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time ?,Ham. I am constant to my purposes, they follow the King's pleasure; if his fitness speaks, mine is rea- dy, now or whensoever, provided 1 be so able as now.,Lord. The King and Queen and all are coming down, Ham. In happy time. Lcrd. The Queen desires you to use Come gentle en. tertainment to L;Lortes, before you fall to play.,Ha;,. She well inftrufts me. Hor. You will lose this wager, my lord. Ham. I do not think so; since he went into France, I have been in continual practice; I flal! win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill all's here about my heart-- bur it is no matter.,Hor. Nav, good my lord. Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of b mifniivinc as would perhaps trouble a woman.,H'.-. If your mind dislike any thin, obey it. I will foref'al their repair hither, ant fay you are not fit. HaUD,a Ves, Er. dit,,b gR~te-i~lsa, gin-givi77g.
Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now. 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be now: if it be not now, yet it will come; the readiness is all. Since no man has ought of what he leaves, what is't to leave betimes ?,SCENE V. Enter King, .ueen, Laertes and lords, with other at- tendants with foils, and gantlets. A table, and fla- gons of wine on it. King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me. Ham. Give me your pardoi, Sir, I've done you,wrong, But pardon't, as you are a gentleman. This presence knows, and you muff needs have heard How I am punished with fore diftration. What I have done That might your nature, honour and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness: Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes ? never Hamlet. If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away, And when he's not himself, does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet do's it not; Hamlet denies it: Who does it then his madness. If't be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd, His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy. Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil, Free me so far in your most generous thoughts, That I have Lhot mine arrow o'er the house, And hurt my b brother.,Laer. I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive, in this cafe, ihould stir me most To my revenge: but in my terms of honour I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement; 'Till by some elder masters of known honour I have a voice, and president of peace,02 To b mother.
To keep my name ungor'd. But till t-at time, I do receive your offe-'d love like love, And will not wrong it.,h-/.m. I embrace it freely, And will this brother's wager frankly play. Give us the foils.,L.:r. Come, one for me. Htam. I'll be your foil, Iaertes; in mine ignorance Your skill frali like a flar i'th' darkeit night S:ick fiery off, indeed.,L..-r. Ycu mock me, Sir. :..7:. No, by t-.is hand. K'in2. Give the!n the foils, young Ojfric'.. hamlet, tyou know tl-e wager.,Ham. W'ell, my lord, Your rrace hbat- laid the o'ds o'th' weaker fide.,K':-. I do not fear it, I have seen you both: But since he's be:ter'J, we have therefore odds.,Latr. This is too h2eavy, let me fee another. ,Eran. This likes me well these foils have all a lengthl ? [Prebares to play. Ocr. Av, my good lord. K-;,;. Set me te roops of wine upon that table: If Hi.m!et aive the first, or second hit, Or quit in anifwer of the third exchange, Let ai! the battlements their ordnance fire. The King ihiall drink to Hamlet's better breath, And in the cup an a Onyx shall he throw, Richer than ,h:at which four fucceflive Kings In Dcnm..rr':s cro, n have worn. Give me the cups, And let the kettle to the trumpets speak, The trumpets to the canoneer without, The cannons -o :he heav'ns, the heav'ns to earth. 'Kow the King drin ks to Hamwlet. Come, begin, And you the Judges bear a wary eye.,Ham. Come on. Sir. L:er. Cmine. mI lord. [ They plia. ,J4r. n0 .,Hawm. a LI;..
317 d.C: 'I'uigTment. '.; A h!it, a very palpable hit.,·,aer. Well again- S;ta. Stay, giv e drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine, -Eee's to thy health. Give him the cup.,[ Trumpetfound, Shot goes off. Ham. I'll play this bout firfi, set it by a while.,[ They play. Come - another hit - what fay you ? Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confess. Kin'. Our son lhall win. C6ieen. He's fat, and scant of breath. Here, Hao!let, take my napkin, rub thy brows, The QuLOin carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.,.nam. Good madam- IKing. G(erru&de, do not drink.,',!ten. I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me. Kh'.. It is the poifon'd cup, it is too late. [aside. Iam.: I dare not drink yet, madam, by and by. 6Ecen;. Come, let me wipe thv fice. Ller. I'll hit him now. King. I do not think't. Laer. And yet it is almnt against my confcicnce. Ham. Come, for the third, Laertes, you but dally, I pray you pass with your best violence, I am ai;aid you make a wanton of me. Laer, Say you so ? come on. [Play. Ofr. Nothing neither way. Laer. Have at you now. [Laertes wa-nds Hamlet, then iin ftrfffin thcy,change rapfers, and Hamlet :cao:n.!s Laertes. King. Part them, they are inccns'd. Ham. Nay, come again - Ofr. Look to the Queen there, ho ! Hor. They bleed on both fides, How is't, my lord ? Ofr. How is't, Laertes? Laer. Why, as a woodcock to my own fprindge,,Ofrick,,0 3,I'm
I'm justly kill'd with mine own treachery.,Eatn. How does the Queen ? Kind. She swoons to fee them bleed. ieen. No, no, the drink, the drink- Oh my dear Hamlet, the drink, the drink, -- 1 am poifon'd -- -ueen die.,Ham. Oh villany ! hoe ! let the door be lock'd: Treachery ! seek it out,LaEr. It is here. Hamlet, thou art slain, No medicine in the world can do thee good. In thee there is not half an hour of life; The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, t ITnbated and envenom'd: the foul practice Hath turn'd it self on me. Lo, here I lye, Never to rife again; thy mother's poifon'd I can no more - the King, the King's to blame.,Ham. The point envenom'd too Then venom to thy work, [Stabs the King,,Ail. Treason, treason. Krin. 0 vet defend me, friends, I am but hurt. Ha;:. Here thou incertuous, murd'rous, damned Dane, D-rink off' this potion: is d the onyx here ? Follow rml mother. [King dies,Laer. He is justly serv'd. it is a poison temper'd by himself. Exchange foiaivenefs with me, noble Hamlet; Mine and mn fatler's death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me ! [Dies.,';: ,: Heav'n make thee free of it, I follow thee. :n Si-ad, oiratio; wretched Queen, adieu! You that look pale, and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this a&, lad I but time, .(as this fell ferieant death Is strict in his arrest) oh I could tell you --. But let it be - Horatio, I am dead, Thou liv'f, report me and my cause aright,To r It fiems by this that unbated and envenomed are ti.-o d.'ren: thirns, therefore embaited appears not to be the ri'ht read'ig, p. 299. d the mnion.
3;p To the unsatisfied. Hor. Never believe it. I'm more an antique Roman than a Dant; Here's yet rome liquor left. Ham. As th' art a man, Give me the cup; let go, by heav'n I'll have't, Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things flanding thus unknown, shall live behind me > If thou didft ever hold me in thy heart, Absent thee from felicity a while, And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain, To tell my tale. [March afar of, and flout within. What warlike noise is this?,SCEN E VI.,Enter Ofrick. ofr. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from,Poland, To the ambafladors of England gives This warlike volley. Ham. 0, I die, Horatio: The potent poison quite o'er-grows my spirit, I cannot live to hear the news from England. But I do prophefie th' election lights On Fortinbras, he has my dying voice, So tell him, with th' occurrents more or less, Which have solicited. - The reft is silence, [Dies, Hor. Now cracks a noble heart; good-night, sweet,prince; And flights of angels sing thee to thy reft! Why do's the drum come hither? Enter Fortinbras and Englilh Ambassador, with drum,,colours, and attendants. Fort. Where is this fight Hor. What is it you would fee? If ought of woe or wonder, cease your searchs,0 + rt.
Fort. This quarry cries on havock. Oh proud death i What feast is tow'rd in thine t- eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily haft struck .,A;ab. The fight is difial, And our affairs from England come tpo late: The ears are senseless that ihould aive us hearing; To tell him his comm;nd'ment is iulfill'd, That Rcfircrof, and Giildtnftern are dead: Where should we have our thanks .,Her. Not from his mouth, Had it th' ability of life to thank you: He never gave command'ment for their death. But since so full upon this bloody queflion, You from the Polarc wars, and you from England, Are here arriv'd; give order that there bodies High on a flage be placed to the view, And let me speak to th'yet unknowing world, How these things came about. So shall you hear Of cruel, bloody, and unnatural ants, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning, and forc'd cause, And in this up[hot, purposes mistook, Fall'n on th' inventors heads. All this can I Truly deliver.,FArt. Let us haste to hear it, And call the c Nobless to the audience. For me, with sorrow, 1 embrace my fortune, I have some rights of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim, my vantage doth invite me,,Her. Of that I Ihall have also cause to speak, And from his mouth whose voice will draw no more: But let this fame be presently perform'd, Even while men's minds are wild, left more mischance On plots and errors happen.,Fort. Let four captains Bear Hamlet like a soldier f to the stage;,For t In another edition infernal. c nblefl. off the fiage.
For he was likely, had he been put on, To have prov'd most royally. And for his paahge, The soldiers mufick, and the rites of war Speak loudly for him - Take up the body : such a fight as this ]iecomes the field, but here Ihews much amiss. Go, bid the soldiers shoot.,[Exeunt marching: after which, a peal ofordnanca,are Jljot off