Disclaimer: This file is generated using OCR (optical character recognition) and/or HTR (handwritten text recognition), which are technologies that convert images of text into text. While the technologies are good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Shakespeare restored: or, a specimen of the many errors, as well committed, as unamended, by Mr. Pope in his late edition of this poet. Designed Not only to correct the said Edition, but to restore the True Reading of Shakespeare in all the Editions ever yet publish'd. By Mr. Theobald
SHAKESPEARE restored:'-,OR, A S P EC I MEN,OF THE Many E R O R S,,AS WELL Committed, as Unamended, by Mr. POPE,In his Late EDITION of this POET.,DESIGNED Not only to corret the faild E D I T ON, but to restore the True,READING of SIHAKESPEARE in all the Editions ever yet publifh'd.,By Mr. T HEO B A L D. --------- Laniatum Corpore toto D E I P H o BUM M vidi k lacerum crudeliter Ora, Ora, manmufque ambas, -------- VIR G.,L O N) 0 N: Printed for R. FRA N CLI undei' om's, J. WooD AN and D. LY o,under YilPls, Covent-Garden, and C.DAVIS in Hattoen.Garden.,M. cc. xxVI.
TO 70 HN RICH Efq;,S IR,,T may seem a little particular, that, when I am attempting to restore SHAKESPEARE, I fliould address that Work to One, who has gone a great Way towards shutting him out of Doors; that is, towards banifling him the Bene- fit of the Stage, and confining us to read him in the Closet. Let me stand excused from intending any personal Accusation here; for it is not You, indeed, but that Affedion, with which Entertain-,A 2 ments
ments of a different Species are pursued, has done this; and therefore I would fain transfer the Fault from You to the Town. Let us lay it upon the Times, as we are pleas'd to do some of our Sins upon Fate and Providence. Or, perhaps, the very Frame of our Nature is concern'd; and the Diffecders of an Eye and Ear can tell us to what Membranes, or Organs, we owe the Communi- cation of 'Pleasures, in which the rational Soul has no Share. So Ihall we be able to account. both for the Reception of GROTESQUE and OPERA.,IF PANTO-MIMING be a Debauchery of the Stage, it is a Vice which is so becoming 'in the Excellence of Your own Performance, that I can scarce find in my Heart to be the first to wish it cur'd. Yet, as it is fabled of A-CHILL.ES'S Spear, that it had a Virtue to heal the Wounds it made; so we may prophesy, one Time or other, that the Rust of PANTOMIMES will be,a
- a,:Salve .for the Recovery of D R A MA T I C Poetry.,I AM, justified in this Address by another Con- fideration, which is, That however you may have been a .Sinner.againft SHAKESPEARE, yOU are not an impenitent one. And as King Henry 1V. ere6ted a Chapel to expiate the Ihijuries which he had done to his Predecessor, King Richard; so, the Town at least fay, you intend to appease the Manes of our POET by ereFfing a MONUMENT to him. Go on in that pious, that reputable Intention; and, while the Taste of the Publick demands it of you, continue to sacrifice frefl Pan- tomimnes to his Memory; when .their Palates alter, convince them that You are provided to enter- tain them with an Elegance suitable to their Ex- pedations.,-BUT I am falln into a Strain which I had no Thoughts of pursuing, when I first fate down to write this Epistle. The great OTWAY dedicated,oine
one of his Plays to his Bookseller, as a Receipt for the Copy-AlJoney; and I meant this merely (fiparva licet componere magnis) as an Acknow- ledgment of some Obligations receiv'd, which you will not expec me to specify in Print. I de- fign'd it to carry the Sentiments of FriendJbip and Gratitude; but, where it falls Thort in those Points, let it make Amends by this Profeflion, that You are always entitled, to the utmost of my poor Power, to demand all the Service of,S IR, Tour most Obliged, and,Faithful Humble Servant, March IS. I725.,LEWIS THEOBALD.
SHSAESPEARE reftor'd:,OR, A SPECIMEN of ERRORS, &C.,INTRODUCTION.,HAVE very often declar'd, and that in a num- ber of Companies, that what thro' the Indolence, what thro' the Ignorance of his EDITORs,we have scarce any Book in the EnglifiJ Tongue more ser- tile of Errors, than the Plays of SHdAKESPEARE. And, I believe, whenever I have fall'n on this Subjea, I have not fail'd to express my Wilh, that some fine Ge- nius, equal to the tafl, would befriend the Memory of this im- mortal Poet, and contribute to the Pleasure of the present and of future Times, in retrieving, as far as possible, the original Purity of his Text, and rooting out that vast Crop of Errors, which has almost choak'd up his Beauties.,B IT
I T was no fmail Satisfaction therefore to me, when I first heard Mr. POPE had taken upon him the Publication of SHAK ESPE ARE. I very reasonably expected, from his known Talents and Abilities, from his uncommon Sagacity and Difcernmenrt, and from his unwearied Diligence and Care of informing himself by an happy and extensive Conversation, we ihould have had our Author come out as perfeCt, as the want of i..i.fci'ipts and oi ginl Copies could give us aPoflibility of hoping. I may dare to fay, a great Number of SHAKESPEARE'S Admirers, and of Mr. POPE'S too, (both which I sincerely declare myself,) concurred in this Expecation: For there is a certain curiosa fe- licitas, as was said of an eminent Roman Poet, in that Gentleman's Way of working, which, we prefum'd, would have laid itself out largely in such a Province; and that he would not have fate down contented with performing, as he calls it himself, the dullDitty of an EDITOR only. SHAKESPEARE'S WIorks have always appear'd to me like what he makes his HAMLET compare the World to, an un!ieeded Garden grown to Seed. And I am sorry there is still reason to complain, the Weeds in him are so very sparingly thin'd, that, not to speak out of compass, a thousand rank and unsightly ones are left to flare us in the Face, and clog the Delight of the expeted Profped.,IT must neceflarily happen, that where the Affitfance of iLanrfcripts is wanting to set an Author's Meaning right, and rescue him from those Errors which have been tranfimitted down thro' a Series of incorrec Editions, and a long Interven- tion of Time, many Passages must be desperate, and past a Cure, and their true Sense irretrievable, either to Care, or the Sagacity of Conje&Eure.,A ND there is one Unhappiness too, which generally attends the Republication of Englizj Books, which is, That being the Pro- perty of some Persons in Trade, who, too often, know nothing more of their Copy than that there is a Demand for reprint- ing it; and who are, withal, Persons of such commendable Fru- gality, that they think every Farthing which is given for the Labour of ReviJe, to be so much Money given away for nothing: The Press is set to work from a printed Precedent, and so the,more
more the Editions of any Book multiply, the more the Errors multiply too, and propagate out of their own Species. " Of " this (to borrow the Words and Observation of my ingenious "Friend, * Mr. SEWEL ;) Shakespeare is a very remarkable In- " fance, who has been handed down, from Age to Age, very incor- " rei., his Errors increasing by Time, and being almost conflantly " republifh'd to his Disgrace. Whatever were the Faults of this "great Poet, the Printers have been hitherto as careful to multiply " them, as if they had been real Beauties; thinking, perhaps, with " the Indians, that the disfiguring a good Face with Scars of arti-,ficial Brutes, had improv'd the Form and Dignity of the Per- " Jfn.",THi S, indeed, has not been altogether the Cafe in the late Edition of SHAKESPEARE : The BOOKSELLER, who farms a Right to ome part of this Author, and claims a Right to foime other part of him, has so far mifunderflood himself, (I mean, in ContradiEion to the Rule of Trade,) as to be at the Expence of having his AUTHOR revised; and therefore we promised our- selves, this WoRK would be compleat.,I HAVE so great an Esteem for Mr. POPE, and so high an Opinion of his Genius and Excellencies, that I beg to be excused from the least Intention of derogating from his Merits, in this Attempt to restore the true Reading of SHAKESPEARE. Tho' I confess a Veneration, almost rising to Idolatry, for the Writings of this inimitable Poet, I would be very loth even to do him Justice at the Expence of that other Gentleman's Character. But, I am persuaded, I shall stand as free from such a Charge in the Exe- cution of this Design, as, I am sure, I am in the Intention of it; for I am assuming a Taflc here, which this learned Editor seems purposely (I was going to fay, with too nice a Scruple) to have declined.,To explain nmyfelf I mutl be obliged to make a short Quo- tation from Mr. POPE, in his Preface to SHAKESPEARE : " In " what I have done, fays he, I have rather given a Proof of my " Willingness and Defie, than of my Ability to do hiim Jflice. I,B z " have *, In hb:r Preface to the Szvosilb Iltlme l of the l'Arh of SIIAK£ESI'PAIE, i;, Qlurto.
bhae difclharg'd the duill Duty of an Editor, to ;my best yudgment, r': ith nore Labo!ur th:i 1 expit Tbanks, with a religious Abhor- "rence of ail Innovation, and wtithout any Indulgence to my pri- : va-e Sense or Conjecl:ure." I cannot help thinking this Gentle- man's Modefly in this Point too nice and blameable; and that what he is pleased to call a religious Abhorrence of Innovation, is downright S.,perfition : Neither can I be of Opinion, that the Writings of SHAKESPEARE are so venerable, as that wre Ihould be excommunicated from good Sense, for daring to innovate pro- pi-rly; or that we ought to be as cautious of altering their Text, as we would That of the sacred 1 Vritings. And yet even They, we fee, have admitted of some Thousands of various Readings; and would have a great many more, had not Dr. BENTLET some particular Reasons for not prosecuting his Undertaking upon the New Tefatnent, as he propos'd.,CEPRTAINLY, that Physician would be reckon'd a very un- serviceable Member in the Republick, as well as a bad Friend to himself, who would not venture to prescribe to a Patient, be- cause not absolutely sure to cure his Diltemper: As, on the other hand, he would be accounted a Man of very indifferent Morals, if he rashly tamper'd with the Health and Constitution of his Fellow-Creature, and was bold to try Conclusions only for private Information. The fame Thing may be said with regard to Attempts upon Books: We {hould shew very little Honefly, or \Wisdom, to play the Tyrants with any Author's Text; to raze, alter, innovate, and overturn, at all Adventures, and to the utter Detriment of his Sense and Meaning: But to be so very referv'd and cautious, as to interpose no Relief or Conjeflure, where it manifestly labours and cries out for AffifPance, seems almost as absurd as the Indolence of that good honest Priefi, who had for thirty Years together mistakingly, in his Breviary, read .ii.mpfimin/s for S ,!iupmius; and being told of his Blunder, and fol- licited to correct it, The Alteration tay be jt.fi, said he; but, bo:ve-e;r I'll not change ny old Ml-UMPSIL.s for you1r new SUMP- SI'xFORS.,FOR
F o R my own part, I don't know whether I am mifiaken in Judgment, but I have always thought, that whenever a Gentle- man and a Scholar turnsEditor of any Book, he at the fame Time commences Critick upon his Author; and that wherever he finds the Reading fufpeted, manifetly corrupted, deficient in Sense, and unintelligible, he ought to exert every Power and Faculty of the Mind to supply such a Defea, to give Light and restore Sense to the Passage, and, by a reasonable Emendation, ro make that fatisfadory and confident with the Context, which before was so absurd, unintelligible, and intricate.,THIS is a Task, which, as I above intimated, Mr. POPE has pluprofely difclaim'd, and which I (by what Fatality, or with what Event, I know not;) have taken upon my self to prosecute. I am not insensible under what Disadvantages I must set out upon such a Work, and against such an Antagonifp; ----- impar con- greffls ACHILLI: But as I have laid it down as a Rule to my- self not to be arbitrary, fantastical, or wanton, in my Conjec- tures upon our Author, I shall venture to aim at some little Share of Reputation, in endeavouring to restore Sense to Passages in which no Sense has hitherto been found; or, failing in that Hope, must submit to incur, which I ihould be very unwilling to do, the Censure of a ralh and vain Pretender.,As SHAKESPEARE Rfands, or at least ought to stand, in the Nature of a Classic Writer, and, indeed, he is corrupt enough to pass for one of the oldest Stamp, every one, who has aTalent and Ability this Way, is at liberty to make his Comments and Emendations upon him. This is a Palm, which (as TERENCE said, of writing Comedies) is in common to every poetical Contender:,--.------ In media omnibus Palmam eje pojistam, qui artem traflant muJicam. And he, who has the Luck to be allowed any Merit in it, does not only do a Service to the Poet, but to his Country and its Language. This Author is grown so universal a Book, that there are very few Studies, orColleftions of Books, tho' finall, amongst,which
which it does not hold a Place: And there is scarce a Poet, that our Englif Tongue boaifs of, who is more the Subjec of the Ladies Reading. But with what Pleafire can they read Pas- fages, which the Incorrecmefs of the Editions will not susser them to underfand ? No Vein of Pedantry, or Ostentation of useless Criticism, incited me to this Work: It is a Sacrifice to the Pleafare of SHAKESPEARE'S Admirers in general; and should it fail of all the Success which I wiih, it may chance to work this good Effet, That many will be tempted to read this Poet with a more diligent Eye than hitherto: The Consequence of which will be, that better Criticks will make their own Observations, with more Strength than I can pretend; and this Specimen prove only an Invitation to lead them into nobler Corredions. If, however, till that happens, where SHAKESPEARE has yet, thro' all his Editions, labour'd under flat Nonsense, and invin- cible Darkness, I can, by the Addition or Alteration of a fin- gle letter, or two, give him both Sense and Sentiment, who will be so unkind to fay, this is a trifling or unwarrantable At- tempt ? Or, rather, if I may dare to flatter myself so far, what true Lover of this Poet, who flall find him so easily cur'd, will not owe his Thanks for a Passage retriev'd from Obscurity, and no Meaning? and fay, SHAKESPEARE mufft certainly have wrote so------? But I remember a Line in Horace, which ought to flop me short, and give me tome Fears:,:.id dignuim tanto seret hic promifir hiatu ? I am running too largely in debt, upon Promise, to my Rea- ders, and they are calling for Payment in some Specimens of nmy PerfJrmance.,I am lorry that the Use and Intention of this Undertaking ties nme down to the NecefiSty of one unpleasant Office, That of setting right the Faults in Pointing, and those meerly literal, committed by the Printer, and continued by too negligent a Revifl. This is the Drudgery of Correction, in which I could wish to have been fpiar'd, there being no Pleasure in the Execu- tion of it, nor any Merit, but that of dull Diligence, when exe-,cuted.
cuted. But, uinpLafant as it is, even this Part mull be difpens'd wkih; and all that I can do, to ease miyfelf or Readers in it, is to mark these minute Corrections with all poflible Brevity, and proceed to more important Matter.,I CAxN scarce fufped it will be thought, if I begin my Animadversions upon the Tragedy of HAM1LET, that I have been partial to myself in picking out this Play, as one more fertile in Errors than any of the reft: On the contrary, I chose it for Reasons quite opposite. It is, perhaps, the bell known, and one of the most favourite Plays of our Author : For these thirty Years last pall, I believe, not a Season has elaps'd, in which it has not been perform'd on the Stage more than once; and, consequently, we might presume it the most purg'd and free from Faults and Obscurity. Yet give me Leave to shy, what I am ready to prove, it is not without very gross Corruptions. Nor does it lland by itself for Faults in Mr. POPE'S Edition: No, it is a Specimen only of the epidemical Corruption, if I may be allowed to use that Phrase, which runs thro' all the Work: And I cannot help faying of it, as AEneas does of the Greeks Treachery upon the Inllance of Sinon's,,----------- Crimine ab into 'Dife omnes: ------------ IF HAMLET has its Faults, so has every other of the Plays; and I therefore only offer it as a Precedent of the fame Errors, which, every body will be convinced before I have done, pof- fess every Volume and every Play in this Impreilon.,BUT to proceed from Aflertion to Experiment: In order to which I ihall conflantly be obliged, that the Emendations may fiand in a fairer Light, to quote the Passages as they are read, with some part of their Context, in Mr. POPE'S Edition; and likewise to prefix a flort Account of the Business and Circum- stances of the Scenes from which the faulty Passages are drawn; that the Readers may be inform'd at a tingle View, and judge of the Strength and Reason of the Emendation, without a Refe- rence to the Plays themselves for that purpose. But this,will
will be in no kind necessary, where Faults of the Press are only to be corrected: \Vhere the Pointing is wrong, perhaps, That may not be alone the Fault of the Printer; and therefore I may sometimes think myself obliged to assign a Reason for my altering it.,As every Author is best expounded and explain'd in One Place, by his own Usage and Manner of Expreflion in Others; wherever our Poet receives an Alteration in his Text from any of my Corrertions or Conljetres, I have throughout endeavour'd to support what I offer by parallel Passages, and Authorities from himself: WYhich, as it will be my belt Justification, where my Attempts are seconded with the Concurrence of my Readers; so, it will be my best Excuse for those Innovations, in which I am not so happy to have them think with me.,I H _A E likewise all along, for the greater Ease and Pleasure of the Readers, diflinguith'd the Nature of my Corretions by a ifort marginal Ncte to each of them, viz. False Pointing, Faife Pri-it, r-iot!s Reading, Parage omitted, Conjectural Emendation, Eienation, and the like; so that every body will at once be appriz'd what Subjecl-matter to expet from every refpetive Division.,THE
THE Examination and Correction,OF THE TRAGEDY of HAMLE T.,I. Adt i. Scene i. Page 346. HE Nyon fame flar, that's wefitward from thepole, Rigrions,Reading Had made his course t'illume that part of heav'n IWhere now it burns, -- SOME of the old Editions read, t'illumine; which seems to be the truest deriv'd Word, (from illumino in the Latin,) and is the Word used by our Author in another Place.,Two GENTLEMEN of VERONA, pag. 19y.,If I be not by her fair Influence Fofler'd, illumin'd,,C In
In another of his Plays, our Poet has extended this Word to illuminate.,JULIU S C SAR, pag. 234.,---.-..- Wjhat Trash is Rome ? JIhiat Rl.ibbiJfh, and -hat Offal? wben it serves For the bare Matter to illuminate So vile a Thiilg as Crfar? And I almost think, Mr.PorE was of the Opinion that illumine, rather than illume, in this Place of Hamlet, is the right Word; since he, in another of the Tragedies, has wrote reltmine, tho' one of the old Editions there have it relume.,OTHELLO, pag. 578.,I know not where is that Promethean Heat, That car thy Light relumine. ------ But may it not be objeced, that if we hould read,,Had made his Course t'illumine that Part of Heav', &c. this Additional Syllable spoils the Scanning of the Verse ? In a Word, too nice a Regard muff not be had to the Numbers of SHARESPEARE : Nor needs the Redundance of a Syllable here be any Objetion; for nothing is more usual with our Poet than to make a Daayl, or allow a supernumerary Syllable, which is funk and melted in the Pronunciation. It were most easy to produce above a thousand Inflances of this Cuffom in him; but unnecefiary, because they lie open to the Observation of every difceming Reader.,II. Ibid.
II. Ibid. Page 347. So fi'own'd he once, when in an angry Parle [,] Ealfe Toint- He smote the Jfedded Polack on the Ice. All the old Editions, which I have seen, read it rightly with; out the second Comma;,So fiown'd he once, when in an angry 'Park He fnlote &c.,III. Ibid. Page 350. Shall I firike [ ] it with my Partizan ? Various,Rteading. The Versification manifestly halts here, without any Necessity. The second Edition in Folio, printed in 163 , and which is one of those that Mr. POPE professes to have collated, makes out the Numbers of this Line by reading,,Shall I frike at it with ny Partizan ?,IV. Ibid. Page 3o0. --.... . I have heard, rag Point.,;rg. The cock [ ] that is the trumpet to the morn, 'Doth with his lofty and fhrill-founding Throat &c. It ought to be pointed, as it is in the Quarto Edition, of 163 7; (of which I ihall have Occasion to speak anon.),-----.. I have heard, The Cock, that is the Tru7mpet to the Morn, 'Doth &c.,C 2 V. Ibid.
V. Ibid. Page 35I. F£4: Pi.-.<- But look, the moin in rjffet mantle clad , ],"" ~ tpWalks o'er the dew &c.,Here again, either the second Comma mufl be entirely taken away, or this Passage must be stopp'd thus;,But look, - - - the orn, in rujiet Mantle clad, Walks o'er the Dew &c.,VI. Acd i. Scene 2. Page 352. FH TP'- sCLAUDrD S, King of Denmnark, his Queen, Hamlet, and Cour- CEJ.rr: tiers, coming upon the Stage, the King makes a Speech, apolo- ;o.i-. gizing, and giving Reasons, for his hasty Marriage with his Bro-,ther's Widow. He then proceeds to acquaint them, that For- tinbras of Norway, supposing the State of Denmark to be much weaken'd and disjointed by the Death. of the late King, had demanded, with Threats of Invasion, certain Lands loft by his Father to the said late Dani/fl King; and that therefore he (Claudius, the now King) had wrote Letters to the old King of Norway, desiring him to suppress his Nephew Fortinbras's unjufl Procedure in that Affair. This is the Bufmefs and Import of the Speech; let us now fee how it stands in the Edition.,----.---.- Nor have we herein barr'd Tour better wisdoms, which have freely gone Wtith this affair alng [,] (fr all, our thanks.) NMow follows [, ] that you know [ ] joung Fortinbras, Hoding a mean flppofal of onr worth; Or thinking by our late dear brother's death Our slate to be disjoint andoout of firae [, ] COLLEAG7VED with this dream of his advantage [; He hath not fail' d to pefler us with r e/age, &c.,Tho'
Tho' all the printed Copies, that ever I have seen, concur in reading Colleagued in this Place, I cannot but think it carries a harih and intricate Sense, and does not so aptly fall in with the Context. This makes me fufpest it corrupted from a Word very near it, both in Sound and Writing, and which carries a much more plausible Meaning, as well as connects better both with what precedes and follows. 'Tis true, Colleagued signifies joined with, putting himself on the Side, or Faction of, &c. and therefore it is not to be utterly disallowed in Sense. But if we can only, with the Alteration of a Letter or two, substitute another Word that gives a stronger and more proper Image, and connects better with the Reasoning of the Passage; I hope, I hall be allowed to offer it, at least, as a Conjedure, if not as a Cor- reEion. Suppose therefore that SHAKESPEARE might write it thus;,.--------- or have WIe herein barr'd 2our better Wisdoms, which have freely gone With this Affair along: (For all, our Thanks.) Now follows that you know, Toung Fortinbras, Holding a weak Supposal of our Worth ; Or thinking, by our late dear Brother's 9eath, Our State to he disjoint, and out of Frame; * COLLOGV)E) with this D)ream of his Advantage, He hath not fail'd to pester us with Message, &c. Here you have a Reason for the Young Man's Opinion, and Proceeding, and for his Insolence in making the Demand on Denmark, vi. he being flattered, imposed on, cajo'd, by the Dream of his Advantage. However, if the Readers are inclined to imbrace the first Reading, I am willing to retract Mine, or at least keep it to my self, which I proposed but as a Guess. The,CorrecRion *Al0lOglte, Blandtiis tentare, partim deflexo fenfit, Lat. Colloqfi; velfi a Germanica Orgeine deducere malls, a Teut. tofen, garrire, & 3Lugen; Belg. tlogeCtt, lentiri: q. d.. [UODglen elisi propter Euphoniam : . d. blandis MenIdaciis imponere.,SXINNER'S Lexic. Etymolog..
Corre&ion of the next Passage shall be founded on something more than Conjeture.,VII. Ibid. F4s. - ....-- [re have here writ,To Nonrway, uncle of )yong Fortinbras,,bWho [ 3 imiotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of ti his his nephew-s plrpofe, to filpprefs His firther gate heirin [. I] n that the levies, The lifts, anddfdll proportions are all made Ont of his Subjecs [; ] That is, We have writ to the Old King to flop his Nephew's Expedition, because his Army is compos'd all out of the old King's Subjects. But this Passage is so pointed, that, by the Reasoning being disjoined from the Sentence of which it ought to be a Part, the Sense is so much weaken'd, that it is almost loft. Restore it therefore, as some of the Editions lead the Way;,.-------.. Ye have here writ To Norway, Vincle of joung Fortinbras, Fibo, iiipotent andbed-rid, fJarcely hears Of this his Nepihew-s Purpose, to fpprefs His filrther Gate herein; in that the LeviesJ The Liss, and fill Proportions, are all made Ot of his Subjecs:,VIII. Ibid. C:=Wjr! ..--------- and e here dispatch C2-on._- T7o;o, good Cornelius, and)on Voltimand,,FOR bearers of this greeting &c.,The
The Word, FOR, here seems to be meerly fupplimental, and introduced to keep the Verse from halting; betides that, to dif- patch for Bearers, is a bald and poor Exprefflon. It certainly will be more in the Stile of Majesty, if we may suppose the Poet wrote;,- .-. ..--- and we here dispatch Tou, good Cornelius, and Tou, Voltimand, OVR Bearers of this Greeting &c. This Speaking in the plural Number connels exacly with the Beginning of the Sentence last quoted, We have here writ, and We here dispatch Toul, and rou, Our Bearers of this Greeting to old Norway. Besides, the Mistake of for instead of our is so easy, that, in the second Folio Edition, it has happen'd again in this very Ad in another Passage; and the plain Sense has'led the later Editions to cored it.,Haml. Never to peak of This that you have feet,,Swear by my Sword. Ghost. Swear. Haml. Hic, & ubique ? Then we'll shift FOR Ground.,IX. Ibid. Giving to you nofurtber perfinal power Variou OF TREATT with the King. &c. This is a Reading adopted, and of a modern Stamp, as I talk it; either from Want of Understanding the Poet's genuine Words, or on a Supposition oftheir being too stiff and obsolete. All my old Copies have it, as I think it ought to be retor'd,,Giving to you no firther perfontal Pow's TO BUSINESS with the King, &c.,i. C.
i. e. to negotiate, or tranfaa with him. It is a Licence in our Poet, of his own Authority, to coin new Verbs both out of Sub- flanti-es andAdje&ives; and it is, as we may call it, one of the Quidlibet audenldi's very familiar with him. I'll throw in a few Instances of the like kind, and it were very easy, with little Pains, to produce a Croud more. (i.) TE PEST , pag. 32. M.ve;7 7;The Setting of thine Eye and Cheek proclaim erbs. 4A MIatter from Thee, and a Birth indeed,,Which throes thee much to yield.,i Trhes signify a Woman's Pains in Child-bearing; and he here ufRs the Word for p.si thee, or gizes thee tbole Pains. (2.) So again, pag. 54.,-------- And the Thunder, That deep and dreadfil Organ-4Pipe, promounc'd The Name of Prosper; it did 'base my Trespass, &c.,; it did play a terrible Base to it; resounded hoarsely in a Bafe-Tone. (3.) MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM, pag. I38.,And as Imagination · bodies forth The Forms of Things unknowin, the Roet's Ren Turns them to Shape, &c.,· gives them Bodies. (4.) Two GENTLEMEN of VERONA, pag. 213.,Recking as little what betideth me, As much I wish all Good ' befortune y3u.,' fall to you by good Fortune. (5.) MEASURE for MEASURE, pag. 370.,Lord Angelo · dukes it w-ell in his Abfience, &c.,' ass, represents, the Dake. (6.) And
(6.) And again, pag. 3 7 . Either this is Envy in You, Folly, or Mijiaking: the very Stream of,his Life, and the Busiess he hath f helm'd, &c.,f manag'd; fteer'd, as at the Helm. (7.) MAERCHANT of VENICE, pag. 20.,Give him 9Diredtion for this merry Bond, And I will go andg purse the Diucatsflrait, &c.,c put them in a Purse. (8.) KING LEAR, pag. 49.,--.----- I could as well be brought To knee his Throne, and, 'Squire-like, Tenfon beg, &c.,h bend the Knee to. (9.) Second Part of HENR T IV. pag. 3 52.,And therefore will he wipe his Tables clean, And keep no Tell-tale to his Memory, That may repeat and' hiltory his Loft, &c.,tell the Hiltory of. (I0.) HE. NRvV. pag. 418.,--....... tWy ! what readyou there, That hath so cowarded and chas'd your Blood Out of Appearance ?,frighted, made a Coward of. ( I.) HENRT VII. pag. 444.,- ---... And his own Letter, (The Honourable Board of Council out,) Mufl fetch in Him he' papers.,' marks down on Paper.,D' (12)
(12.) TImziON of ATHENS, pag. 7.,------- His large Fortune, Vpon his good a;d gracious Nature hanging, Subdues and ' properties to his Love and Tendance All Sorts of Hearts.,- makes them his own; gives him a Property in them. (13.) So CORIOLANVS, pag. I28.,------ That to 's Pow'r he would Have made them AIMules, Jilenc'd their Pleaders, and 'Difproperry'd their Freedoms.,- took away the Property of. (14.) And again, pag. 20o.,Now, by the jealous Queen of Heaven, that Kirf I carried from thee, VDear; and nmy trte Lip Hath' virgia'd it e'erJince.,- kept it as chailely as a Virgin. (15.) MACB ETH, pag. 547.,--------- I've feel Hours dreadfdl, and Things flrange; but this fore Night Hath trifled form7er Kno.wings.,! made Trifles of. (65.) ASTHON. and CLEOPATRA, pag. 402.,---------- Eros, Wyould'j tho be ' window'd in great Rome, &c.,plac'd in a Window.,(17.)
(17.) OTHELLO, pag. 50I.,.------ He bath atchiev'd a Maid That , paragons ~Description and wild Fame.,, out-goes, sets a Paragon, or Pattern to. (18.) TROILUS, pag. 24.,And with ridiculous and awkard Altion (IYhich, Slanderer ! he Imitation calls,) He pageants us.,plays us over, {hews us as in a Pageant. I am afraid of growing too luxuriant in Examples of this Sort, or I could firetch out the Catalogue of them to a great Ex- tent. I {hall only shew by a few Inflances that it is as familiar with him to make Verbs out of AdjeyEives, and so shall return to HAMLET. (I.) WINTER'S TALE, pag. 594.,------ Which had been done, 'Profs of,Adjeflives But that the good Mind of Camillo ' tardied made Verbs. My swift Command.,f(opp'd, made flow, or tardy. (z.) CYMBELINE, pag. I23.,------- Tote married ones, If each of you would take this Course, how many MufJ murther Wives much better than themselves For wrying but a little ?,going awry.,D (3.)
(3.) TROILus, pag. i I.,Hark ! hio-z Troy roars, how Hecuba cries out, How poor Andromache ' hrills her Volour forth.,i screams thrilly. (4.) LULIis C2ESAR, pag. 288.,And . aturie mufl obey Xecejity, jlhich we will L niggard -with a little Reft.,d We will make but short Re:, be Niggards of it. (5I) TITUS ANDROyICUS, pag.433.,Patient your fielf, Madam, azd pardon me.,t malie your felt patient. (6.) A-NTHO-T and CLEOPATRA, pag. 322.,------ - And all this (It wounds thine Honour that I/peak it nowj,) Was born so like a Soldier that thy Cheek So much as r lank'd not.,grew ln-, or lean. (7.) And, again, pg. 33 7.,Age cannot wither her, nor Cuom c stale Her i;nfnite Variety.,z mke fiale.,X. Ibid. Volt. In that, and all Things, will we shew orar auty. Ring. IFe doubt IN nothing, &c.,All
All the Editions, that I have seen, read, I think, more rightly,,We doubt IT unohing. i. e. We in no wife doubt, but you will.,XI. Ibid. Page 354. Butyo musIl know, joQr fathet loft a father, VRid;o, That father [ ] his, &c.Readi All the Editions, that I have met with, old and modern, (and so, I know, the Players to this Day constantly repeat it,) read,,But you miuf know, your Father loft a Father, That Father loft, loft his; ---- The Reduplication of the Word loft here gives an Energy and an Elegance, which is much easier to be conceiv'd, than ex- plain'd in Terms. Every Reader of this Poet, however, must have obferv'd how frequent it is with him to use this Figure, (which the Rhetoricians have call'd Anadiplosis;) where he in- tends either to assert or deny, augment or diminilj, or add a Degree of Vehemence to his Expreflion. Of this Usage, were it necessary, I could bring a great Number of Examples; but the Instances, that I can at present remember in him, which seem moll to resemble this before us, are the following. ( .) OTHELLO, pag. 483.,-- - The 5Duke does greet you, General, And he regires your haft, poft-haft Appearatce. EEv'u on the Inflant. (2.) Firfl Part of HE N R IV. pag. 23 9.,And That would nothing siet my Teeth on Edge, Nothing so much as mincing Poetry.,C3 -
(3.) And Ro E o, pag. 272.,Fain would Id-ell o Formne, fain, fain deiy /7bat I havefpoke. (4) So TI mON of AITHENx , pag. 58.,------ -yho dares, who dares, In fPurity of Manhood, Jfand upright, Andfay, This Alan's a Slaterer ? (5.) Andfo MA1CBETH, pag. 581.,I know him now. Good God betimes remove The Means, the Means, that make us Strangers.,XII. Ibid. F-c a1 As any th.e must vulgar thing to Sense.,Corred it,,As any the tmil vulgar Thing &c.,XIII. Ibid. Page 355. F,4 PC.- And the king's rowfe the heav'l shall bruit again ],Re/peaking earthly Thunder. Read it with a Comma;,And the King's Rore the Heav'n shall bruit again, Refpeaking earthly Thunder.,XIV.
XIV. Ad i. Scene 3. Page 355. The King, Queen, and Court, quitting the Stage, HAfLETECiJetiara remains, and makes a Soliloquy; beginning with this double Wiih, either that his too solid Flelh would melt away into a Dew,,Or, that the Everlafling had not fixt His CANNON 'gainfl Self-laughter. -- - There is a various Reading upon this Passage, as Mr. Po PE might have obferv'd, which, in my Opinion, merits a Confide- ration, and, pofibly, may give us the Poet's own Words. If he wrote it as it now stands, his Thought is, Or that the Almighty had not planted his Artillery, his Resentment, or Arms of Vengeance againfl Self-murther: But the Quarto Edition, publilhed in 703. (which, indeed, has no other Authority, than its professing to be printed from the Original Copy ;) and the Impression of HAM:LEr set out by Mr. Hughs, Both read,,Or that the Everlafling had notjixt His CA NON 'gainj? Self-laughter. i. e. That he had not rePtrain'd Suicide by his express Law, and peremptory Prohibition. It is a Word that SHAKESPEAR E has ufed'in some others of his Plays; and the Miflake of the Printers is so very easy, betwixt a double and a single n, in Cannon and Canon, that it has atually happen'd elsewhere in our Author upon both these very Words.,CORIOLANUS, pag. 148.,--.---- Shall remain ? Hear you this Triton of the Minnow ? mark you His abfoltte Shall ? Comin. 'Twas from the CANO N.,i. e.
i. e. from the aMouth of the LanP, as Mr. POPE rightly under- stands it; tho' the second Folio Edition has it corruptly, 'Twas fiom the Cannon. So again, on the other hand, twice in the second Acl of King BoHN, the second Folio Edition has it;,The Canons have their Bo-:els frill of IWrath, &c. And afterwards,,Their bart'r;;i Canon, charged to the Alouths, &c. Tho' 'is manifest, in both Places, it ought to be Cannon, with a double n. I cannot help throwing in one Instance more, be- cause the Error has not only obtained in the old and common Modern Editions, but has likewise got a new San&ion in Air. POPE's Edition.,TIrMo, pag. 59.,Religious CANTMrO .TS, civil Laws are cruel, Tjen what fho.ild Aar be? The Propagation of this Fault is-manifestly owing to the Negli- gence of Revisal; and all future Impressions must correa it, --- Religious Canons, &c. But to pass from these Mistakes of thePrefs, there is another Passage in King JOHN, where the Poet. uses the Word Canon to signify Decree or Ordinance, pag. I29.,The CANON of the Law is laid on him, &c. So in CoRIOLA-us, p , pag. 9 20.,-------- lWhere 1 find him, were it At home e uTon ry Brother's Gctard, even there Againf the hospitable C4ANOATNould I Itafh ny fierce hand in's heart. But besides that the Poet frequently employs the Terme, I have two or three Reasons more which induce me to think, that, in this Place of HalLET, he intended the Injunfion, rather than,the
the Artiliery of Heaven. In the first Place, I much doubt the Propriety of the Phrase, fixing Cannon, to carry the Meaning here supposed. The Military Expression, which imports what would be necessary to the Sense of the Poet's Thoughts is, mounting or planting Cannon: And whenever Cannon is said to be six'd, it is when the Enemy become Matiers of it, and nail it down. In the next Place, to fix a Canon or Law, is the Terme of the Civilians peculiar to this Business. This Virgil had in his Mind, when he wrote, gEneid VI.,----... Leges fxit pretio, atque refixit. And it was the conflant Custom of the Romans to fay, upon this Occasion, figere legem; as the Greeks, before them, ufedthe Synonymous Term, aeya. But my last Reason, and which sways most with me, is from the Poet's own Turn and Cast of Thought: For, as he has done in a great many more In- Itances, it is the very Sentiment which he falls into in another of his Plays, tho' he has cloath'd it in different Expressions.,CvrIBELINE,pag. 178.,-------- 'Gains Self-flaughter There is a TPROHIBITIONro divine, That cravens my weak Hand.,XV. Ibid. After HAMLET has finish'd the two before mentioned Wishes; S,,i Po.n- He falls into this Descant on the Grossness of the World, and ,oI Rad- on his Mother's hasty Marriage with his Uncle. i".,How weary, flale, fat, and unproftable [ ] Seem to me all the ifes of this world [? ] Fie on't! oh fie! 'tis an unweeded Garden [ That grows to Seed; things rank, and gros in nature [ Posess it meerly [ ] that it should come thus [. ] But two months dead ! &c.,E Besides
Besides that the Heraiflich ..- that it fIhould come thus, .. is very mean and bald, as well as very indifferent EngliJ ; I think, the Editor ought to have taken Notice, that there is a various Reading of old Date; which I verily believe to be the true One, because it makes the Passage much more elegant, and connecive with what follows. The whole Paflfge should be pointed, and stand thus;,How weary, sale, fat., anid unwroftable, Seem to me all the Vses of this WYorld! Fie on't ! oh, fe ! 'Tis an unweeded Garden, That grows to Seed: Things rank, atndgros in Nature, TPofefs it meerly. - - - That it flould come to this - - - But Two Months dead! &c. This is an Exclamation that our Poet makes his Lear, when in the Height of Agony for his Daughter's Ingratitude to him, flopping ihort his Pafion, break into,LEAR, pag. 27;,----- - - Old foind es, Be-eep her once again, I'l pluck you out, A.ndcaftyou. with the Waters that you lose, To tenper Clay. -.- Ha ! - - - Is it come to this ? So likewise Cleopatra, when Anthony is rating and taxing her with Incontinence, for suffering Char's Agent to kifs her hand, fur- prized at the Extremityof his Jealousy, cries out, pag. 38 1.,--------- Oh! s't come to this ? So HAM LET, here, having made his general Reflexions upon the Grossness of the World, breaks into an Interjection of Sur- prize at once, and turns his Thoughts in particular upon his Mother's Condu& with Regard to her second Marriage: And so proceeds gradually to the Consideration of her late Husband's,Tenderness
Tenderness to her, and a Comparison betwixt him and her pre- sent Consort.,XVI. Ibid. So excellent a king, that was, to this, Emendation. Hiperion to a Satyr: So loving to my Mother, That he permitted not the winds of Heav'n Viit her face too roughly, Here, again, is a Passage in which we have a fophiflicated Read- ing, copied from the Players in some of the Modern Editions, for Want of understanding the Poet, whose Text is corrupt in the old Impreflions: All of which, that I have had the Fortune to fee, read,,-.--....- -So loviag to my Mother, That he might not BE TEENE the Winds of Heav't Visit her Face too roughly. 'Tis true, there is no such Word in Englif), that I know of, as beteene; and yet I am verily perfwaded, our Author's Words were so very like it, that it is only a Corruption from the Mif- take of a tingle Letter, and tvwoWords getting too close together. See, how easy a Change restores you the Poet's own Words and Meaning.,- .--- -- So loving to my Mother, That he might not LET E'EN the tWids of Heav'n Visit her Face too roughly,,XVII. Ibid. - -- -- --- Married with mine Vt)cle, riou My father's brother ; ] no more like my Father Reading. Than I to Hercules.,E z Thus
Thus Mir. POPE reads it, with a nice Regard to the Numbers; not confidering how perpetually the Poet, as I before remark'd, melts a Syllable in Pronunciation. The Generality, if not All, of the Editions have it with an emphatical Disjunstive in the Middle of the Reflexion.,-.-- -.-- Married with mine rVncle, Iy Father's Brother: --- but no more like my Father, Than I to Hercules.,XVIIL Ad I. Scene 4. Page 38. Fr., Pr.r ------ .... Two-nights together &c.,Corre., with all the Editions,,'."-- .. Tso Nights together &c: Tlere is no more Reason for the Hyphen here, than there would be a little lower at this Verse,,Bawnd I with them the third Night held &c.,XIX. Ibid. erESz HI-aml. Indeed, E 3 Sirs, but This troubles me.,The second Folio Edition (as Mr. POPE might have obferv'd, who in so many Paflages has a particular Regard to the Num- bers,) makes a full Verse of this;,Indeed, Indeed, Sirs, but This troubles me. Which Rediplication of the Word seems to give a much fironger Empha/is to Hamlets Concern.,XX. Ibid.
XX. Ibid. Page 359. Haml. His Beard was grisly · Ffi - Hor. It was, as I have fete it in his Life,,Afable-Jflver'd. Here again, with the old Editions, the Hyphen ought to be re- mov'd, and we mufl read,,A Sable Jflver'd. i. e. a black, (fubintellig. Beard; and the Adjeftive is put like a Subflantive,) grown white, or filver'd over with Age.,XXI. A1 I. Scene 5. Page 360, i. ------- but you mfl fear E[] Fas PKoit;- His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own. 'As this is pointed, the Sense is absolutely maim'd; for Great- ness appears the Accusative Cafe to the Verb fear: Whereas, in the Poet's Meaning, it is an Ablative absolute. Read it there- fore,,-.------ butyou msii fear, His Greatness weigh'd, his Will is not his owar. That is, his Greatness being weigh'd or confider'd by you, you must have this Fear, that his Will is not in his own Power, but subjel to the State.,XXII. Ibid. Page 36I. ------- for on his Choice depends . Conjeard,EmendatioBm e S A N C T I T Y and Health of the whole State. I do not well underfand the Force, or Reason, of the Word Santity in this Place. Does it mean the Sacredness and Reve-,rence
rence due to Majesty ? They could not so well susser by HAMLET'S Choice of a Wife; but the Health, or Preservation, of the State might, in some Degree, be concerned by it. The Quarto Edi- tion of 63 7 has a Various Reading, which I find Mr. Hughs has espoused in his Imprefflon of this Play, vi. The Safety and Health &c. The Meaning, 'tis true, of the Poet is here im- plied, tho' not exprefs'd in his ownTermes; but the Verifiication is miserably crippled by it. To depart therefore not above a Letter or two from the present Reading for the Poet's own Word, as I conceive; suppose, he might have wrote,,------- for on his Choice depends The S ANIT Y, and Health, of the whole State. i. e. The Welfare, Preservation &c. The Word Sanity might not be so well known to the first Editors, as the other; as therefore fufpecling it a hMifake of their Copy, they, with the more Rea- diness, might fubifitute Sanvcity in its Room. Not but this very Term occurs again afterwards in thefecond Ai of this Play. And that Sanity and Health, put together, may not be thought a Tautology to be queftion'd in our Author, in the next Pas- sage, where I find it, it is likewise joined with a Synonymous Word of its own Efficacy and Signification.,HA LET, page. 386.,How pregnant, rfoetiimes, his Replies are . A Happiwefs that often Madnzefs bits on, Which SANITY and Reason coud not be So prorp'7oujly delizer'd of. For by Sanity here is meant not the Health of Body, but Sound- ness ofUnderftanding. Now, to {hew how natural it is for the Press to make a Mistake betwixt Words so like one another, as Sanctity andSanity: It happens that the Quarto Edition of HAMLET, which I above mentioned, printed in I703. reads the very Palfage, las quoted, in this corrupt Manner: ---- How pregnant some- tire his hReplies are! A Happtnefs that often Madness hits on,,which
which Reason and Sandity could not so happily be deliver'd of. Here SanEtity, as in the other Passage, is erroneously fubfitituted in the Place of Sanity. And to deal freely, I have fufpeded that the fame literal Slip upon this Word has been made in another Pas- sage of our Poet: I fay, it has been a Suspicion of mine; for I urge it no farther than as such, and with the utmost Diffidence. However, I shall give it here, as Occasion offers, and submit it to the Decision of better Judgments. The Place is in Macbeth, pag. 580. where Malcolme, Macduff, and an English Physician, are talking of the extraordinary Gift to King Edward the Con- feffor, of curing by his Touch poor Souls that could find no Relief from the Aid of Phyfick, in that Diflemper which fuc- ceeding Times have call'd the King's Evil. The Words are these:,Malc. - ----- Comes the King forth to Day? Doaor. Ay, Sir; There are a Crew of wretched Souls,That flay his Cure; their Malady convinces The great Assay of Art. But at his Touch, Such SANCTITY bath Heaven given his Hand, They presently amend. I do not enirely objec to this Reading that has the Warrant of all the Copies on its Side; nor am I at a Loss, I think, to understand its Meaning. Edward the Confessor was a Man of singular Holiness, for which Heaven blefs'd him with that mi- raculous Power of curing by a Touch. But did the Santity of his Hand do these Cures? Or was it an healing Property impart- ed by Heaven, inReward of his rare Piety ? Certainly, the latter: And This has induc'd me to fiufpea' that our Poet wrote;,--------. But at his Touch, Such SANITY hath Heavengiv't his Hand, Theyprefently amend. i. e. Such a Quality and Power of making whole all whom he touches; This Conjecure, perhaps, will receive some Strength from cer- tain Expreflions in the Reply of Makolme to this Account of the Dodtor. A
Aimojfl mizracNlos Wtork in this good King ; TWhich often fice my here-remain in England, I've seen him do. How he follicits heav'n, Himself best knows; but flrangely-virted Peole, Allf,:oln and uk'rous, pitiful to the Eye, The meer VDefpair of Surgery, he cures; Hanging a Golden Starp upon their Necks, put on with holy Prayers: And, 'tis spoken, To the ficceeding Royalty he leaves The healing BeneditSion ------ I {hall leave it here naked, without any reinforcing, to be em- braced, or rejeaed, at every Reader's Pleasure: Being resolved not to draw upon my self the Odium of imposing what I pro- fefed to offer but as a Guess; or the Chance of being laughed at for too fondly maintaining what may happen to be repugnant to every good Judge's Sense and Understanding.,XXIII. Ac i. Scene 6. Page 362: EC.=fsird . Tet here, Laertes i get aboardfor shame i] Enmencon,. 3 ...m . mri- The windfits in the shoulder of your Sail,,AiAndyoit areflaid for [ ] there [ . ] My Blejfing with you; Here again the Editor seems in the first Verse to have a nice Regard to the Numbers. In all the old Editions, that I have seen, the firfl Verse is;,Tet here, Laertes ! Aboard, aboard, for Shame; But the Variation is of no Moment. But then, in the third Line, why is not --- And you are fltaidfor .. as good, and as full Sense as --- And you are flaidfor there? This Adverb in theClofe seems a dragging and an idle Expletive; and of no Use but to support the Measure of the Verse. But if we come to point this Passage right, and to the Poet's Intention in it, we shall find it neither unnecessary, nor improper, in its Place. In the,Speech
Speech immediately preceding this, Laertes taxes himself for flaying too long: but feeing his Father approach, he is willing to stay for a Second Blessing, and kneels down to that End.,Laer. I fay too long; - - - But here my Father comes:,A double Blefing is a double Grace; Occasion fiiles upon a econd Leave. [Kneeling. Polonius gives him his Blessing accordingly; and therefore it ought to be read, (as I perceive my Two Quarto Editions of 163 7, and 1703, have it;) in Support of my Conjeaure.,Tet here, Laertes Aboard, aboard, for Shame: The Wind fits in the Shoulder of your Sail, Andyou are flaidfor. ---There, --- my Bleffng with you;,[ Laying his Hand on Laertes's Head' XXIV. Ibid. Page 363.,Omnifilonfu/- lWhat is't, Ophelia, he [ ] said toyou? Pi1y'l All my Editions have it, more numerously;,WThat is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?,XXV. Ibid. Page 363. --- 7ender your self more dearly; Various,Reading, Or ( not to crack the wind of the poor phrase ) Rad CiC,tural Emiu- WRON G I N G it thus, you'll tender me afool. dtion The second Folio Edition and Mr. Hughs's read, --- Roaming it thus,--- WhichWord, indeed, as our Etymologifis explain it, me- taphorically takes in our Poet's Meaning: and in such Sense is fre- quently ufedby him infeveralothersof hisPlays. But as, Wronging it, has the Authority of several old Books, we may correct the Pas- sage with much less Variation from the present Text, thus:,------- Tender your self more dearly; Or, (not to crack the Wind of the poor ThrafI,) RANGING it thus, you'll tender me a Fool.,F i.e.
i. e. You, behaving yourself with so much Carelessness and Li- berty, will bring me into Contempt for not taking firiAer Care of your Condut.,XXVI. Ac. i. Scene 6. Page 364. OPHELIA having received the Addresses of HAMLET, Polonius, oher Father, takes her to Task for Indiscretion in too lightly giving an Ear to the Prince's Protetfations. He tells her, that /HAM-LET may walk with a greater Latitude, than her Honour and Reputation will. admit her to imitate: And betides that, being in the Heat of Youth, and professing himself a Lover, his Soul was prodigal to lend his Tongue Vows; which Polonius cautions her to look upon not as the real Sentiments of his Heart, but as Baits to betray her Virtue. Upon which he counsels her thus:,-----.- In few, Ophelia, ')o not believe his 'vows; for they are brokers, Aot of tbat die which their i;ve/ilments shew But meer iinplorers of unholy filits, Breathing like fanciifed and pious BONDS, The better to beguile. ------ Thus indeed all the Imprefflons, which have ever come in my Way, read this Pafiage; even that Edition of HAMLET, revised by the late accurate Mr. John Hughs. I muff own, I have al- ways stumbled at it; and been furprized how Men of Genius and Learning could let it pass without some Suspicion. What Ideas can we form to our selves of a breathing BOND, or of its being fanotif.sd and pious? Surely, so absurd a Thought could scarce come from SHAKESPEARE. The only tolerable Way of reconciling it to a Meaning without a Change, is to suppose that the Poet intends by the W'ord BONDS, Verbal Ob- lig-tions, Proteflations; and then, indeed, these Bonds may, in some Sense, be said to have Breath: But this is to make him guil- ty of overtraining the Word and Allusion ; and it will hardly,bear
bear that Interpretation, at least, not without much Obscurity. As he, just befbre, is calling amorous Vows, Brokers, and Im. plorers of unholy Suits; I think, a Continuation of the plain and natural Sense diredts us to an easy Emendation, which makes the whole Thought of a Piece, and gives it a Turn not unworthy of our Poet. I am, therefore, very willing to fufpe& it came from his Pen thus, tho' none of his Editors have ever been aware of it ;,-.-----. Iwfew, Ophelia, )0D not believe his Mows; for they are Brokers, Not of that Dlye which their Inveftmeits shew, But meer Implorers of unholy Suits, Breathing like Jfanlified and pious BAWDS, The better to beguile. It is usual with our Poet, as his Critical Readers must have ob- served, to give those infamous Creatures the Style and Title of Brokers; of which it may not be amiss to subjoin a few Ex- amples. In his two Gentlemen of Verona, page, 6i. Lucetta, the Servant of Julia, having received a Love-Letter to her Miferefs as in her Name, talia, who has a Mind to {hew a Dif like of this Proceeding in her Maid, thus repremands her.,Now, by my Modefyj an goodl B RO KE R 'Dare yeo prefitme to harbour wanton Lines ? To whijer and conupire againfl my Touth ? Now, trifl me, 'tis an Office of great WYoth; .nd'yot an Officer fit for the Place. Where it is plain that Broker is used but as a more modest Word for Bawd; and the Business of fich a One is defcrib'd in the Lines that follow it.,So likewise in All's well that ends well, pag. 4zo. Helena, dif- coursing with the Widow her Hostess, concerning Count RoJ- fillion's Condua; and the Widow intimating that her Daughter,F z Diana
Diana might have an Affair with him, if ihe pleas'd; Heleina fays that, It may be, the amorous Count follicits her in the unlaw- ful Purpose: To which the Widow replies,,-------- He does indeed, And brokes with all that can in filch a Suit Corrupt the tender Honour of a Maid. Where brokes, or brokers, evidently implies -- tampers with, treats with, as with Bawds.,So likewise in King JOHN, page 142. Falconbridge descanting on Commodity and Self-Intereft, and how all Ranks and Degrees of Persons were subservient to it, and, as it were, feduc'd and betray'd to forsake Virtue thro' its Instigations, uses these Expressions:,That BROKER, that Jfill breaks the Pate of Faith, That daily Break-Vow, He that wins of all, Of Kings, of Beggars, Old Men, Toung Men, Maids; Who having no external Thing to lose But the Word Maid, cheats the poor Maid of That, &c. And, afterwards, a little lower he subjoins,,This BAWD, this BROKER, &c. BESIDES, what itrengthens my Suspicion, and makes this Emen- dation the more necefiary and probable, is, the Words with which the Poet winds up his Thought, the better to beguile. Every Body, I believe, is satisfied that it is the Custom of Bawds to put on an Air and Form of San5ity, to betray the Virtues of Young Ladies; by drawing them firfi into a kind Opinion of them, from their exterior and dissembled Goodness. And Barrds in their Of- ice of Treachery are likewise properly Brokers; and the Implo. rers, and Promoters, of unholy (that is, unchafle) Suits; and for a Chain of the fame Metaphors is continued to the End.,XXVIL
XXVII. WE come now to a degraded Passage, as Mr. POPE fliles it; Emenda- that is, One not receiv'd into the Text, but plac'd (as fufpeded, and too bad to belong to SHAKESPEARE;) at the Bottom of his Page. I must transcribe the whole PafGage, tho' long, before I attempt to set it right; because it happens to labour under false Spelling, false Pointing, false Reading, false Concord, and flat Nonsense. Mr. POPE introduces the Verses with this short Note. [I*Thefe 2 x Lines following are in the firPf Edition, but since left out, perhaps being thought too verbose.1 Since left out? --- I have a Quarto Edition, which, I suppose, Mr. POPE never saw; (printed by R. roung and John Smethwicke, in the Year i637.) where they are not left out; but inserted with an Addition, which, tho' very corruptly printed, when amended; I doubt not will appear to be of our Author's own Writing: And they are again inserted in the other Qarto Edition publish'd in 1703, and in the HAMLET revised by Mr. Hughs. So that they have not been left ott, al- together, from the Time of the firfi Publication. But to the Lines; ---,HAMLET, holding the Watch with Horatio, in Order to fee his A,. sc.- Father's Apparition, a Noise of Warlike Mufick is heard : Which ., Horatiodefirous toknow the Meaning of, HAMLET tells him, that the King fat up to drink, and whenever he took his Draught, the Kettle-Drum and Trumpet proclaim'd the Triumph of his Pledge. Horatio asking, whether it was a Ctifom; HAMLET re- plies, Yes; but one that, in his Opinion, it were better to break, than observe: And then falls into the following Reflexion, how the Danes were reproach'd for Drunkenness, and what a Blot that Charater was in their Escutcheons.,(i.) This heavy-headed revel, eafJ and-'weJt E;] (2.) Make s s traduc'd, and tax'd of-other nations [, (3.) They C L I P drunkards, and with fwiniflp phrtafe,Soil our addition; and indeed it takes,Fron
From o.ir atcieaeements, tho' perform'd at height, T7e pith an;d marrow of our attribute. (4.) So [ ] oft it chances in particular men, (5.) That fir fame vicious MOLE of nature in them,,As iz their birth (-herein the' are not guilty, (6.) Since nature cannot chufie his origin [ ] ),By the o'ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales andforts of reason; Or, by some habit, that too much o'er-leavens The forme of plaijive manners; that these men Carrying, If/ay, the Jlamp of one defel, (7,.) (Beingnature's livery, or fortune's S TAR [ ) (9.) HIS virtues else, be they as pure as grace,,As infinite as mana may unAergo, Shall in the general censure take corruption (ic.) From that particular fault. -- - [The 'Dram of E A S E (i i.) Doth all the noble fibjftiace of A DOUBT,To his vwn Scandal. ] I COIE now to the Correftions, in which I'll endeavour to be as brief as the Proofs, in Support of them, will give me Leave. The first Three Lines are mighty easily reclified, being only ac- cidentally, as I suppose, wrong pointed; and one Word as acci- dentally, for Want of due Care in the Revisal, wrong spelt: Which XMifakes,-however, both alter and injure the Sense. They must be read, as some of the Editions rightly have them.,(i.) This heavy-eaadeed Revel, east and -es?, ( i.) Mlakes :s tradnc'd, ad tax'd of other Nations; (3.) They CLEPE us Drunkards, ----- The Sense and Signification are very different betwixt the Words Clip and Clepe; and the latter is manifestly intended here, vi. They cal us Drunkards. The fame Error has flipt the Editor's Diligence in another of our Author's Plays, where this Word occurs again in the Sense of caging:,MAc-
MACBETH, pag. 552.,------.- Jater-rugs, and demy-wolves are CLIPT Occaji;al,CorrcaZix. All by the Name of/Dogs. In which Place it must be correced,,---- [Water-rugs, and demy-wolves are C LE P ' T All by &c. And so tcitp'b, and yclp't, are to be met with an hundred Times in Chaucer, SpenJer, and Hudibras. But, in another Place of our Poet, I observe, the Editor has taken Care to spell this Word as it ought to be.,WI N TE R'S TA L E, pag. 5 6.,Three crabbed Months had sowr'd themselves to VDeath, E're I could make thee opela thy white Hand, And CL E P E thy fef my Love : Then didj? Thou utter, I'm yours for ever. Now, to Clip, is illegally to ctt or maim the Coin; and likewise to gripe or embrace: In Both which Senses SHAKESPEARE has more than once used the Word. As, in the Sense of cutting the Coin, (i.) KENT in King LEAR, pag. 93.,To be acknowledg'd, Madam, is o'etpaid; All ny Reportsgo with the modest truth, Nor more, nor clipt, but so. (2.) So, King HENRT V. in the Play which bears his Name,,pag. 459. Indeed, the French may lay twenty French Crowns to one they will,beat us, for they bear them on their Shoulders: But it is no English Treason to cut French Crowns; and to morrow the King him/elf will be a Clipper.,So
So, in the other Sense of embracing, (i.) King JOHA., pg,. 18.,---- 0 Nation, that Thou couldaf remove! That Neptune's Arms, who clippeth Thee about &c. (Z.) COR IOL A v US, pag. I79.,------- Here I clip The Aivil of my Sword, &c. (3.) ANTHONYr and CLEOPATRA, pag. 35I.,Whate'er the Ocean pales, or Sky in-clips, Is thine, if thou wilt ha't. (4.) CrriBELINE, pag. I57.,------ HSis meanest Garment, Tbat ever hath but clipt his Body, &c. (5.) And again, pag. 239.,Vunboiwn to you, nf/ought, were clipt about With this mojf tender Air. (6.) And so O'HELLO, pag. 542.,lttnefi, you ever-burning Lights above! rTo Elements, that clip us round about! Oc,,=~!> There is one Place, indeed, in which Mr. POPE, and some of,C- . the former Editors, have writ this Word differently; but it ought,to be correfed.,Second
Second Part of HENRT VI. pag. I69.,And now loud houling WTolves arouft the Jades, That drag the Tragic melancholy Night: ,Who with their drowsy, flow, and flagging Wings Cleap dead Mens Graves; It 1hould be, clip dead Mens Graves, if I understand the Sense of the Passage; i. e. clasp; hover over, brood upon &c. But to re- turn to the Passage immediately under Correction.,(4) So ] oft it chances in particular Men, igs, and E (5.) That for some vicious MOLE of nature in them, indation.,As in their birth (wyherein they are not guilty, (6.) Since nature cannot chufe his origin [ ] ),By the o'ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales ana forts of reaon i Whhat Relation is there betwixt a vicious Mole of Nature, and the Over-growth of a Complexion? Or how can a Vicious Mole be said, or fuppos'd, in any Degree to break down the Fences of Reason, or blemiih the UnderJlanding? A Mole is an exterior De- fee&, appearing upon the Surface of the Skin: and the Over- growth of a Complexion is, as I take it, an unequal Admixture of the Temperaments in the Frame and Composition of our Na- ture; thro' which we become faulty by the Defec of some good, or the Redundance of some ill, Quality. I am unwilling to be too positive in my Corretion of this Place; but, I think from the Tenour of the Context, there is great Room to conjeture that our Author wrote;,So, oft it chances in particular Men, That for some vicious MOULD of Nature in them, &c. When Nature is unequally and viciously moulded, when any Complexion is too predominant, these Accidents may have an,G Effet
Effe& both on Constitution, and the IntelleEual Faculties too; and then Reason, and the other Powers of the Mind, are impair'd and prejudic'd: And this I conceive to have been the Poet's Sen- timent. To make Amends for my Doubt and Diffidence in this last CorreEtion, I'll venture to be more positive in the Next I attempt.,------ That these Menp, Carrying, I ay, the Stamp of one defei , (Being nature's live}'), forrtune's S TAR [ ) The Poet is insinuating, that Men carrying the Stamp but of one Defec, whether it be Nature's Livery, or Fortune's Star, (that is, whether it is owing to Nature, or Accident;) That ihall in Chara&ter overpoife and blemiih the whole Catalogue of their Virtues; and give them the Mark of vicious and corrupt Men. But is Fortune prefum'd to give a Star, where the means a Difgiace? I should much rather suppose it an Ensign of her Favour, than defign'd to set a Mark of Infamy. In ihort, the Cure of this Fault is so easy and obvious, that, I doubt not, but my Readers will acquiesce with me in thinking, that the Poet's Words were;,(Being NTature's Livery, or Fortune's SCAR,) And so the Sense of the whole Paffige hangs together. I am very willing to believe that our Poet intends Nature's Livery as a Term of Reproach, and the Diftincion of some discrediting Z!ality: And, in this Light, I find him using it in his Poem, calld, TARR2UIN and LuCREC.E, pag. 41.,Oh! That is gone, for which I fiught to live,,And therefore now I need not fear to die ; To clear this Spot by Death, at leaf I give,A Badge of Fame to Slander's LIVERY; A dying Life to living lnfamny.,And
And the Word Scar is employ'd by our Poet, not only, in its natural Sense, to signify a Wound in Body; but, metaphori- cally, a Blemish to Reputation. So, in his ANTHONr and CLEOPATRA, pag. 379.,The SCARS upon your3 Honour, therefore, he 5Doespity as conflrained BLEMISHES, Not as deferv'd. (9.) HIS Virtues else, be.They as tare as Grace, Emendatiox, The Poet speaking all along before in the plural Number, as, in particular Men, that thcfe Men &c. it is necessary, to preserve the Concord, to read here;,THE IR Virttes else, &c. Not but it is frequent with SHAKESPEARE, whether thro' Neg- ligence, or Licentiousness, to change his Numbers in this Sort.,I COME now to the concluding Sentence of this degradedtm,,fi'^ Passage; Emendation.,(IO.) [----- The Dram of EASE (i .) 5Doth all the .noble Subfanece of A D UBT,To his own Scandal. ] Which, indeed, looks to be so desperate, that, I suppose, Mr. POPE for that Reason only entirely left it out of his Quotation. In reality, I do not know a Paflage, throughout all our Poet's Works, more intricate and deprav'd in the Text, of less Meaning to outward Appearance, or more likely to baffle the Attempts of Criticifin in its Aid. It is certain, there is neither Sense, Gram- mar, nor English, as it now sands: Yet with a flight Alteration I'll endeavour not only to give it all three, but a Sentimient too, that shall make the Poet's Thought close nobly. What can a Dram of EASE mean? or what can it have to do with the Con- text, supposing it were the allowed Expreflion here? Or, in a,G z Word,
Word, what Agreement in Sense is there betwixt a Dram of Ease and the Subfiance of a DOUBT ? It is a desperate Corruption; and the nearest Way to hope for a Cure of it, is, to confider narrow- ly what the Poet must be supposed to have intended here. The whole Tenour of the Sentences foregoing, is, That let Men have never so many, or so eminent, Virtues, if they have one De- fel; which accompanies them, that single Blemifih hall throw a Stain upon their whole Charader; and not only so, (ifI un- derfiand him right,) but shall deface the very Efence of all their Goodness, to its own Scandal; so that their Virtues them- selve-s will become their Reproach. This is not only a Conti- nuation of his Sentiment; but carries it up with a fine and proper Climax. I think, therefore, it ought to be reftor'd;,-------- The TDram of B A S E )Doth all the noble St.bfance of WO RT H 0 U T To his ova Scandal. The Dram of Bfe, i. e. the least Alloy ofBafenefs or Vice. It is very frequent with our Poet to use the Adjeeive of Quality inflead of the Subflantive signifying the Thing. Besides, I have obferv'd that, elsewhere, speaking of Worth he delights to con- fider it as a Quality that adds Veight to a Person, and connets the Word with that Idea. So, particularly, in ll's Well that ends wel. Pag. 417.,Let every j[ord weigh heavy of her WO RTH, That he does weigh too light. ,And I am the more inclin'd to flatter my self that my Emen- dation may have retriev'd the Poet's very Words, because I find him using something like the ifme Thought and Metaphors in another of his Plays, and putting the fame Terms of Baseness and Worth in Opposition to One another.,C1rs
CrtMBELINE, pag. 185.,From whose so many Weights of BASENESS cannot A Dram of WORTH be drawn. But I have intimated that it is frequent with our Poet to use the Adjestive of Quality, infread of the Subflantive signifying the Thing; and it may be expefed of me to alledge a few Instances of this Pradtice in him. (I.) MEASURE for MEASURE, pag. 3 58.,......... As for vyol, ArdjofsOf Say what you can, my false o'erweighsyour true. silad of i. e. My Falfhood o'erweighs your Truth. tz.) TWELFTH-NIGHT, pag. 488.,How easy is it for the proper false In MWomens waxen Hearts to set their Forms! i. e. Fallhood, or Disguise, in a proper outward Appearance (3.) King LEAR, pag. 7 I:,If WTolves had at thy Gate how'Pd that flern timei Thou fhouldfl have said, Good Porter, turn the Key: Ai cruels else fiebfcribe: But I hallsee The winged Vengeance overtake fich Childrent. i.e. All Things of Cruelty else. (4.) And again, pag. 73.,-------- Full oft 'tis seer, Our mean fecwures us, and our meer Defetas Prove our Commodities. ---- i. e. Our Meanness, our low Fortune, middling State.,......' ...............(5.) King
(S'J/ g-:- , ?'"' p-g. 128.,I:;J litk iAfljra doth contain That large l-'hich djd in Geff'ry. i. e. That compleat Largeness, that full Size. (6.) And CORIOLA.U-S, pag. 149.,-------- Th' AccrSation, hlIhich they have often made againJ? the Senate, All CaufSe unborn, could never be the native Of our so frank 5Donation. i. e. The natural Cause, the Nativity, Birth, Source. BU T to proceed: As I have been oblig'd to branch out this de- graded Speech into so many Parcells; and divide it, the better to give the Reasons of the Emendations; it may not be improper to fubjoine it once more entire, as correced; and leave it to the Judgment of the Publick, whether, notwithfianding the Vebolfenefs objected to it, it ought for the future to be degraded, or receiv'd into the Text of our Author.,Haml. This heavy-headed Revel, east and weft,,IMakes us traduc'd, and tax'd of other Nations; They clepe ius Drunkards, and with fwiziifh Thrafe Soil our ddition ; and, indeed, it takes From our Achievements, tho' perform'd at Height, The RPith and Marrow of our Attribute. So, oft it chances in particular Mejn That for some vicious Mould of Nature in Them, As in their Birth, (wherein they are not guilty, Since NLatuzre cannot chufe his Origin;) By the O'ergrowth of some Complexion, Oft breaking down the Tales and Forts of Reason;,Or
Or by fame Habit, that too much o'er-leavens The Forme of platfve Manners: That these Men Carrying, Ifay, the Stamp of one Defed, (Being Nature's Livery, or Fortune's Scar,) Their Virtues else, be They as pure as Grace, As infinite as Man may undergo, Shall, in thegeneral Ceifure, take Corruption From that particular Fault. The SDram of bae 5Doth all the noble Stbbflance of Worth out, To his own Scandal. ----,XXVIII. WELL; Immediately after this Speech comes the Ghofl; and Fal, o- HAMzLET, in the Agonies of his Surprise and Concern, quetioning, n~a on' how it comes about, that his dead Father, whom he had seen quietly reposited in his Sepulchre, lhould be cast up again, has these Words:,HAMILET, Al i. Sc. 7. pag. 366.,......... WYhat may this mean ? That thou dead coarse again in compleat Steel Revifit'J thus the glimpses of the moon, (1,2,3.) Making night hideous [ ? ] and WEfools of nature [,],(4.) So HORRIDLY to shake our di/2ofitio, (y.) [With thoughts beyond the reaches of our Souls [. 3,Say, why is this? Besides that this Pafage is several times faulty in the Pointin, it is likewise faulty in Language. 'Tis true, WE fools --- is a Reading that has the Countenance of all the printed Copies; but That Authority must nor give a Sanaion to Nonsense, and false Grammar, to the Injury of our Author, when a plain and unexceptionable Remedy is at hand. Making Night hideous, and,.making
ki;aing We Fools of Nature --- Every Body must immediately fee is not EngliAh. I mutl not, however, dissemble, that there are a sewn Palfages more in our Poet, where I have obferv'd the Nominative of Pronouns is used, tho' Grammar requires the Ac- cufarive. As, (I.) CORIOLAIUs, pag. 202.,---.---- Aid to poor WE Thine Enmity's rw capital.- But here it is a Fault as well as in HAMil.ET, and ought likewise to be correced, 'And to poor US. There is another of this Sort which I have obferv'd too, in the Duke's Speech to Angelo in the second Scene of MEASUREfor MEASURE, pag. 3 2.,(2.) .-------- Th fef and thy Belongings,Are not thine owm so proper, as to waste Thy seif opon thy Virtues; THEY on Thee. It is requisite, to make it true Engli)h, to read, THEM on Thee. i. e. As, either, to watle thy seif on thy Virtues, or thy Virtues on thy self So again, in ANTHONY and CLEOPATRI, pag. 3 80.,(3-) --.--- Should I find them,So sawcy with the Hand of SHE here, (what's her Name, Since She was Cleopatra?) Grammar requires that it hould be, So fawcy with the Hand of HER here. And so again in MACBETH, (where Roff, is defcri- bing the Miseries of Scotland from the Cruelty of that Tyrant;) pag. 58 .,(4.) .--...- The dead Man's Knell,Is there ftarce askd, for WHO: Forfo the second Folio Edition, and some of the common Modern Editions read it; but Mr. POPE, in his Edition, has rightly,cor-
correted it for WHOM. It may be alledged from these Initances, and some few more that might be gather'd, that this was a Liberty which SHAKESPEARE purpofelygavehimfelf, and that therefore it is not an Error of the Copies. Be this, as it will; if Grammar and the Idiom of the Tongue be diretly against it, we have sufficient Warrant to make him now, at least, speak true Englifb. BUT cO proceed to my Remarks upon the next Line of this Passage,,So horridly to shake our DZifpoJition &c. I fufpea, in the Word horridly, a literal Deviation to have been made from the Poet by his Copyists: and I'll give my Reasons presently for this Sufbicion. But, firit, it will be proper to subjoin my Correction of the Passage, and the Pointing of it, which is manifestly faulty. For, why is there a Note of Inter- rogation at hideous, to divide the Verb from the Second Accusative Cafe which is govern'd by it, when the Question evidently goes on to the very Close of the Sentence? I think, it ought to be pointed, and reftor'd thus;,.--.---- AWhat may this wean ? That Thot dead Corse again in comneat Steel Revititli thus the Glipfes of the Moon, Making Night hideous, and US fools of Nature So HORRIBLY to shake our 'Di:ofition IYith Thoughts beyond the Reaches of our Souls ? Say., &c. The Change of horridly into horribly is very trivial as to the Literal Part; and therefore, I hope, the Reason for the Change will be something more considerable. 'Tis true, horrid and horrible muff be confefs'd to bear in themselves the fame Force and Signification: as horridum and horribile were wont to do among the Latines. But horrid, in the most common Acceptation and Use, seems to signify rather hideous, uncouth, ugly, enormous, than terrible or frightful: and it is generally so applied by our Author. I remember a Passage in his ling LEAR, where it,,H par.
particularly, flands for ugly. It is in a Speech by the Duke of bai., , reproaching his Wife Goneril with her unnatural Be- haviour.,LEA R, pag. 77',-----.. See tlJyfelf, Devil; Proper Deformity seems not in the Fiend So horrid as iin Womian. I cannot, however, deny, but that our Poetfometimes employs the 'Word horrid in the Sense of frightful, terrible: But every ob- serving Reader of his WTorks must be aware that he does it spa- ringly, and, ten times for every once, seems fond to use horrible and terrible. It is obvious, that he prefers both these Terms, as more sonorous and emphatical than horrid; and the Proof that he does so, is, (which laid the Foundation of my Conjec- ture here,) that he almofl constantly chufes them, even where the Nutmbers of his Verse naturally require horrid. I hall sub- join a few Inflances of both for Confirmation; towhichI could have amafi'd twenty times as many; but these are enough, at least, to excuse me, tho' I lhould be deceived in Judgment, from the Censure of being too hyercriticalin my Observation. Pr;s fj (I.) TEM7PEST, pag. 73. ,ZrZ cf Where but ev'n imw w-ith frange and e-veral Aoifs,· '~ Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling Chains,,And more iDiverity of Sounds, all horrible, lVe were awak'd. (2.) LEAR, pag. 4I.,A-d with this horrible Object froii low Farms, Poor pelting Villages, &c.,(3)
(3.) And again, pag. 5y.,I tax not you, you Elements, with Voikiidnefie; I never gave you Kingdom, call'd you Children, Tou owe me no SnbJfriptio;. Then let fall Tour horrible Pleafiere;----. (4.) And again, pag. 83;,Glouc. Methinks, the Ground is even. Edgar. ---- --- Horribleflee.,Hark, do you hear the Sea ? .) King HENR r VIII. pag. 4 57.,----- With one Hand on bis 5Dagger, Another i/read' oI's Breast, mounting his Eyes, He did discharge a horrible Oathb &c. (6.) TI x O , pag. 61;,--------- For those Milk-paps, That thro' the W'indow-barn bore at Men's Eyes, Are not withia the Lease of Pity writ, Set 'er down horrible Traytors. --- (7.) ANTHONr and CLEOPETRA, Pag. 342.,Hetnce, horrible Villain! or I'll turn thine Eyes Like Ball before me ! (8.) M.ACBETH, pag. 56i.',------ Hence, horrible Shadow ! VnrealMock'ry, hence ! -..-.,H 2: (9.)
(9.) HAMLET, pag. 367.,Wfhat ifit tempt yor tow'rd the Flood, my Lord? Or t the dreadful Smmit of the Cliff That beetles o'er his Base into the Sea, And there afirme some other horrible Form, &c. (ic.) And OTHELL, pag 561. D:fd. IWhat is.our Pleafiere Oihell --. Let me fe your Eyes:,Look in mty Face. Defd. --------- 'hat horrible Fancy's this ? Pr;wf (I.) TEMPEST,-pag. I5.,.J... ------ This damn'd Witch Sycorax, ForMifehiefs maniold, and Sorc'ries terrible To enter human Hearing, &c. (2.) And again, pag. 3 .,E-'n now we heard a hollow Blrnf of bellowing, Like Bills, or rather Lyons; did't not wake 'you? Itfirook mine Ear mofl terribly. Alon. --------. IbeardNothbing. (3.) MACB ETH, pag. 535.,- I'm fettled, and bend sp Each corp'ral Agent to this terrible Feat. (4.) And again, pag. 5 5 .,But let both Worlds disjoint, and all Things filser, E'er we -ill eat our Meal in fear, and Jleep In the Afficiion of there terrible 'Dreams, &c.,(5.)
(S.) And so, OTHELLO, pag. 478.,What is the Reaifo of this terrible Summomns ?,XXIX. Ac i. Scene 8. Page 368. HAMLET being retir'd to a remote Ground with his Father's Cicp;P7;!ra Apparition, the Ghost immediately discloses himself, and the Circumrtances he was under in the other State, as far as he was licens'd, or it was proper for him, to declare.,-----. .- I am thy father's firit; 'Doon'd for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day, confii'd to FA ST in fires; Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purg'd away. Tho' all the Copies, old and modern, agree, in this Reading, I cannot help fufpeEing (at least, till I am better informed of the Force of it ;) the Expression, - - - to fail in Fires. If these are the Poet's Words, his Meaning in them must be, to do Pe- nance in fires : as Faling is often a Part of Penance injoin'd by the Church for our Sins. But could it be any great PAmif- ment for a Spirit, a Being which requires no Suflenance, to faf ? Or could fafling in Fires burn and purge away Crimes more es- featually, than the not being in such a State of Abstinence ? The Poet certainly, in my Opinion, intends to mix the old Pagan Syflem here with the more modern Notion of a local Purgatory; and to intimate, that Souls are cleansed and purified from their Mortal Stains by the Torment of Fire. The Variation will be but very small, to suppose he might have wrote;,And, for the D)ay consn'd to ROAST in fires; Now this takes in all the Ideas necessary to the Punishment, of being burnt, scorched, pain'd, c. (and the Word, thus meta-,phorically
phorically used, conveys no meaner an Image than carving, scalding, raringing, and an hundred other Technical Terms do, frequent in the most elevated Poetry:) But that this was the very Cafe too of our Ghost, his own Words, in a Speech but just before, sufficiently testify.,.------.- ly, Hour is amnofl come, When I to filph'rols and tormenting Flames .nlrft render p vs) self. And our Poet, I remember, afterwards in this very Play, pag. 3 93. again uses the Expression; speaking of Pyrrhts in the Heat of Rage, and running about the flaming Streets of Troy:,-......... ROASTED in Wrath and Fire, &c. There is another fine Passage, that I at present remember, in which our Poet has touched this Subjed of Punishments after Death, and there he does not fay the least Word of fafling in fires: But he makes a Supposition of fiery Floods, like the Infer- ral Rivers, fabled in the old Heathen Poets, and that the Spirits of the Deceased thould be doom'd to bathe in 'em. 1iEA S RE for M.EASURE, pag 363.,4', but to die, and go we know not where: To lie in cold Obflruction, and to rot; Thisei fijble aain Motion to become Akneaded Chd; and the delighted Spirit To BATHE in fiery Floods, or to reside In thrilling Regions of thick-ribbed Ice, To be iilprifoned in the Viewless Winds, And bhlwn with restless Yiolence round about The pendant orld; ------- Now, either to be roafled, or batl'd, in Fire; takes in the Idea of.being burnt and puni/bed; and comes up to the Term among,the
the LATI-ES, exurier igni. VWhoever will allow SHAKESPEARE to have imitated any Passages of the Antients, will, I believe, be of Opinion with me, that in these two Descriptions he had those fine Veries of VIRGIL in his Eye upon this Topick: There are such Strokes of Similitude, as well in the Thought as the Didion, of both Poets. 'IRG. ineid. VI. V. 736, &C.,Non tamen omne Malum miferis, nec fundit(is omnes Corporee excedunt Tefles: penitifque neceffe eft Multa diu concreta modis inolefcere miris. Ergb exercentur pcenis, veterumnque Malorum Supplicia expendunt: alie paaudiutur inanes Sufpetn ad Ventos; aliis sub gurgite vafto Infedtum ekitur Scelus, aut exuritur igni. Which Passage is thus translated by Mr. DRTrDEN.,Nor VDeath it self can wholly wiafh their Stains; But long-contrailed Filth ev'n in the Soul remains.. The Reliques of invet'rate Vice they wear; And Spots of Sin obscene in ev'ry Face appear. For this are various Penances injoin'd; And Some are hung to bleach upon the Wind: Some plung'd in Waters, Others purg'd in Fires, 'Till all the Dregs are drain'd, and all the Rufl expires.,XXX. Al i. Scene 8. Page 369. And each particular Hair to Jfand ON End, Occasjoial Like Quills upon the fretfuil orcupine. Emendation Thus Mr. POPE writes this Paifage, as it ought to be; whereas all the Editions, both old and modern, that I have seen, concurr in reading --- fJand an end, &c. And yet this Passage either,seems
seems to have been recified by Chance, or some others, where the fame Phrase recurs, have been revised with a firange Care- leffnefs. For in the Second Part of Hemy VI. pag. 164. we find him reading with the old Imprefions,,Miice Ees fhosld /9arkle like the beaten Flint, Mine Hair be fixt AN e;'d, like One difiranzght. And so in HAMLET, png, 424.,ror;. bedded Hairs, like Life in Excrements, Start up, and fland AN end. j;7 .l.. Whereas in both these Places we likewise ought to refore it,,---ON end. I cannot dismiss this last quoted Passage from HA-ILET, without taking Notice, that I think the Expression - - - like Life in Excrements, as much wants an Explication, as any the most antiquated Word in our Poet wants a Gloss. Alr. HUGHS, in his Impreflionof HArT LET, has left it out; either because he could make nothing of it, or thought it alluded to an Image too nauseous. The Poet's Meaning is founded on a P,5yfcal Determination, that the Hair and Nails are excrementi- tiol!s Parts of the Body, as indeed they are, without Life or Sensation: And yet that Fear and furprize had such an Effea upon HASrLET, that his Hairs, as if there were Life in those Excrements, started up and stood on End: Or, as he expresses it in his TEMPEST, pag. 13.,Wlitb Hair uipfaring~ then like Reeds, not Hair. That our Poet was acquainted with this Notion in Physics, of the Hair being without Life, we need no flronger Warrant, than that frequently he mentions the Hair, as an Excrement. So, · Tr. Dtr7r.,e I r, fipC is iszct:d by the old Cl. -ical PhyfScins; a 5Point which I have . Let;irre .re l:s .i:;: B: MAC. ! A OBI tlS, i k;,J, (thelPater Pert of whose lritings !.s ,fr-,: Cd/. -;;.) .z .:is S:-urna3ii, (lib. 7. cap. 9.) a v s ; of tho e Parts of the ,S-.-.z-. BA , : -:.:cs b;.c r, S:fs.:isv; '::' ike.s-s affirs tl;e Reafns why they can have -::::. OiTaD, cD n Unguis & Cu piliis, nimrn Siccirnte ita denfata finth utpenetra- b:.ia nL-a si: eaffnci A-rc c1i Si&sr.,:; miniiret. iar.,Comn.
Com. of ERRORS, pag. 432.,Wllhy is Time fJch a Niggard of Hair, being, as it is, so plen-,tiful an Excrement? JEW of VENICE, pag. 49.,How Smany Cowards, whose Hearts are all as false As Stairs of Sand, wear yet upon their Chins The Beards of Hercules, and frowning Mars; lWIho, inward fearch'd.b have Livers white as Milk? And These assume but Valour's Excrement To render them redoubted.,'i. e. a Beard. And in LovE's LABOUR LosT,pag. I47.,For miff tell thee, t will please his Grace (by. the World !)some,time to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his Royal Finger thus daly with my Excrement, with my Mustachio. BUT besides that he so often makes Use of this Term, to put the Matter out of all Dispute, he has the very Thought, which he has here in HAMLET, again in his MACBETH, and ex- prest in much plainer Words, pag. 592.,I have almoj forgot the Tajfe of Fears: The Time has beet,, my Senfels would have coo'd To hear a Night-fhriek, and my Fell of Hair - tould at a difinal Treatise rowze, and tir,As Life were in't.,XXXI. Ibid. The Ghost intimating how foully he had been murthered, con- Con ie,5ral jures HAtMLET by his filial Love to revenge his Death. The Eendation. Prince starting at this dreadful Information,. and the Ghost proceeding to remark, that any Murther, tho' ever so favourable,I in
in its Circumstances, is bad enough, but that the Murther of him was strangely unnatural; HAMLET, impatient to be told the whole Story, fays thus:,Hajfe me to know, that I with wings ass wist As meditation or the thoughts of love, May SWEEP to my Revenge. HB4fLET makes use of the Metaphor here of a Bird using it's Vings fwifrly, to express his Speed in the pursuit of his Re- venge. 'Tis true, to sweep may carry the Sense of gliding fioothbl, and fwifty along; (generally, alongthe Surface of any thing;) but I don't remember the Word ever employ'd to figni- fy the Aaion of a Bird in the Circumtrances ofpurfring its Prey; that is, of moving its Wings irmpetuoufly for that Purpose. In Falconry, a Hawk is said to sweep, when he wipes her Beak after the has fed. But I observe that our Poet, for the moit Part, dses the Word in the plain and natural Sense, of clearing, brujhing away, or trailing on the Earth. So, Second Part of HE-yir VI. pag. 171;,Thy Lips, that kifsd the Quee, shall sweep the Ground. HERrT VII. pag. 541.,Pray, Sir, be patient. Tis as much impoflible, VnleJfs we swept them fi-om the )Door with Cannons,) To scatter 'em, as 'tis to make them sleep On May-day Morning, &c. .sTHO_-r and CLEOPATRA, pag. 373.,--------- Frieds, be gone; 'ou shall Have Letters from me tofome Friends, that will 5weep jour a--ay for you.,MACBETH
MACRETH, pag. 553.,.-----.--- And tho' I could With bare-fac'd Pozwer sweep him frontm my Sight. He uses it once, I think, to describe the smooth March of a Body of Soldiers in gallant Array, and coming timely to the Succour of their Party Third Part of HENRT VI. pag. 297.,And, lo ! where George of Clarence SWEEPS along, Of Force enough to bidhis Brother Battle. But in none of these Places, or elsewhere that I know, is it con- nected with the Metaphor of Wings, or introduced to denote the Jfwift and furious Descent of any Fowl at Es Prey, or Enemy. I had almost forgot to take Notice, that some of the Editors of this Play seem to have fufpeEted the Propriety of this Word here, by a Change which they have made of it: for both the Quarto Edition of 1703, and Mr. HUGHS'S, have substituted in its Place --- May fly to my Revenge. But to proceed to my own Conjeaure: There is another Word, indeed, so very near it in Sound and Writing, and so peculiar to theBufinefs of a Bird falling on its Prey, that, perhaps, the Poet might have wrote:,Haste me to know, that I, -with FJings asJfwift As Meditation or the Thoughts of Love, May SWO OP to my Revenge. I entirely submit this Conjecure to Judgment; but I am sure it is the very Phrase of our Poet upon an Occafion.of the like kind. MACBETH having murthered the Wife and Children of MAACDUFF, the latter, upon Notice of it, falls into these mixt Exclamations of Tenderness and Resentment. Pag. 583.,I·2 . He
He has no Children. - - - All my pretty Ones ? Did.youfay, All? 1Fhat, All? 0 Hell-kite ! tWhat [What all ny pretty Chickens, and their aDam, At one fell SWOOP? ------ And to froop, among Fowlers, is to fly down hastily, and catch up with the Talons, as Birds of Prey do: An Adion which, I humbly conceive, our Author intended to allude to, in the ve- hement Resentment and Desire of Revenge, with which he in- flames his HAMILET.,XXXII. Ibid. Page 370. i.; sR':- TH E Ghost of HAMLET' Father, having recounted to him -ra~E- o .B- the Process of his Murther, proceeds to exaggerate the Inhu-,manity and Unnaturalness of the Fad, from the Circunfbances in which he was furprized.,hus was I sleeping, by a brother's hamrd Of life of crown, of 9ieen at once difpatcht; Cut of ei'n in the bloSsoms of my niJ, tUNHOUZZLED, t UNANONLTED, t uianel'd; ATo reck'ning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfeciions on my head. To which three Words AIr POPE has subjoined this Gloss:,t unhouzzled, witlhmtt the Sacrament being taken. unanointed., without extream urncion. tunanel'd, no knell rung. I am very much afraid (and as apt to believe I shall prove it, to the Satisfafion of every Judge, before this Note is ended;) that this PafTage is neither rightly read, nor, as it is read, rightly explained, throughout. In the sirs Place, inflead of unhouz- 7led it ought to be reftor'd - i -uhot.uie'd; from the old Saxon,Word
Word for the Sacrament, husel. So our Etymologifis and Chaucer write it; and Spencer, accordingly, calls the Sacramental Fire, houfling Fire. This, however, is but a trivial Slip, in compa- rifon with the next that offers it self. I don't pretend to know what Glossaries Mr. POPE may have consulted, and trufis to; but whose soever they are, I am sure their Comment is very fin- gular upon the Word I am about to mention. I cannot find any Authority to countenance unaneal'd in signifying, no Knell rung. This is, if I mitfake not, what the Greeks were used to call an a`-,; AEo.:,io,, an Interpretation that never was used but once. Nor, indeed, can I fee how this participial AdjeEtive should be formed from the Substantive Knell. It could not possibly throw out the i, or receive in the a. We have an Instance in our Poet himself, where the participial Adjetdive of the Verb simple from this Subfiantive retains the h ; and so Mr. PoPE writes it there.,MIACBETH, pag. 598.,Had I as mway Sons as I have Hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer 'Death; .nd so his Knell is knoll'd. The Compound Adjective, therefore, from that Derivation muff have been written, unhnell'd ; (or, iuknoll'd; ) a Word which will by no Means fill up the Poet's Verse, were there no stronger Reasons to except against it; as it unluckily happens, there are. Let us fee what Sense the Word unaneld then bears. SKINNER, in his Lexicon of Old and ObJolete ENGIISH Terms, tell us, that anealel is undius; a Prxp. Teut: an, and i Oleleum: so that unanea- let mutl consequently signify, Not being anointed, or, not having the extream UnEtion. But what muff we then do with the Word, immediately preceding it, unanointed? For, the Addition of it is such a manifell and absurd Tautology, as SHAKESPEARE could not be guilty of. We must therefore have Recourse to the Various Readings, and fee if any printed Copies will help us out. The Second Edition in Folio, the Quarto in i 63 7. the,_ - - , " - Hjt0t-
hamlet revised by Mr. Hughs, and several other Impressions, all read, initead of unanointed,,------ DISAPPOINTED, wianerd; as I verily believe it ought to be read. Now, the Word appoint, among other Significations, has that of composing, reconciling: and the Word Disappointed consequently means, unreconcild to Heaven, unabfjolv'd, and no Appointment of Penance or Atonement made for Sin; a Work of the utmost Concern and Moment to a dying Person, And our Poet, I remember, in another of his Plays, as Otbello is at the very Point of killing his Wife upon Suspicion of Adultery, makes him exhort her thus:,OTHELLO, pag. 587.,.If_ yo bethink yourJelf of any Crime Unreconcil'd as yet to Heav'n and Grace, Sollicit for it fJrait. ----- But it happens very luckily too, in Support of the Old Reading which is necefary to be reftor'd here, that the Poet has again, in another Play, made use of appointment in this very Sense of Reconciliation. In MEASURE for MEASURE, Claudio is sentenced to die for having debauched a Maiden, and his Sifter brings him Word, That his Execution is to be instant; therefore bids him prepare his Self-examination, and to make his Peace with Heaven with all Speed. MEASURE for MEASURE, pag. 361; Ifab. Lord Angelo, having iAfairs to Heav'n,,Intends yout fr his fStift Ambassador; IThere ore shall be an everlajling Leiger. hereoroeyour best APPOINTMENT make with Speed; To morrow yaou set out.,So
So that, this Reading and this Sense being admitted, the Tauto- logy is taken.away; and the Poet very finely makes his Ghost complain of these four dreadful Hardihips, viz. That He had been difpatch'd out of Life without receiving the (lcfte, or) Sacrament; without being reconciled to Heaven and absolved; without the Benefit of extream Untion; or, without so much as a Confeffon made of his Sins. The having no tnell rung, I think, is not a Point of equal Consequence to any of these; especially, if we confider that the Roman Church admits the Efficacy of Praying for the 'Dead.,XXXIII. Ad I. Scene 9. Page 372. HORATIO and Marcellus coming to Hamlet, after the Ghost is de- Emcndarorr, parted, and, questioning him with some Impatience, to know Rea~,. the Reason of the Spirit's walking; Hamlet, refolv'd to keep the Contents a Secret, answers them in a wild, confused Manner; which not giving the desired Satisfaction, Horatio replies to him.,These are but wild and HURLING Words, my Lord. The Editor, indeed, has the Countenance of several Editions for this Reading: Tho' here again, as it happen'd in a former Inflance, some of the Editions faem to have fufpeded the Word, and therefore have printed this Passage thus;,These are but wild and windy Words, my Lord, But in what Sense is hurling to be taken here ? It is always used to signify, throwing, carling, darting out, and, as we are told, in the Old ENGLISH, making a Noise: None of which are with. in the Poet's Meaning, who intends, wild and giddy. It muff; therefore, certainly be reftor'd, as my Quarto Edition of 163 7, tho' corrupt in the Spelling, meant to exhibit it.,Tiefe are but wild and WHIRLING WFords, my Lord. The Acceptation of this Word is so universally known, as well as so apt and peculiar to our Author's Meaning, that, I believe,,few
few will doubt that it was his own Expreflion in this Place: And I have nothing more to do (in Support of this Conjeaure, if it needs any;) than to produce a few Instances from him, to shew that he understood and used burl, and whirl, in the re- fpecive and diftina Senses which I have abovementioned to be- long to them. (i.) King RICHARD IL pag. 96.,And interchangeably hurl down my Gage 7'pon this over-weening Traytor's foot, &c. (2.) First Part of HENR T VI. pag. 21.,Then broke I from the Officers that led me, And with my Nails digg'd Stones out of the Ground, To hurl at the Beholders of nmy Shame. (3.) yUTLIUS C S'AR, pag. 293 . . .,--.------ Come, Anthony; Defance, Traytors, hurl we in your Teeth. (4.) AsTHo-sr and CLEOpATRA, pag. 313.,WJhat our Contempts do often hurl from us, le wish it ours again. ( A.) And OTHELLO, pag. 587.,--.------ When we shall meet at Conmpt, This Look of thine will hurl my Soul from Heav'n, Aid Fiends will snatch at it. In all which Passages hurl signifies to throw, or cafi, and no- thing else. (I.) LOVE'S LABOUR loft, pag. 144.,And JiJlice.i-z., ays whirls in equal Meafitre.,(z.) King
(z.) King yOHN, pag. I 54.,I am with Both, each Army bath a Hand, And in their Rage, I having Hod of Both, They whirl afitntder, and dismember me. (3.) And again, pag. 175.,My Lord, they fay, Five Moo#ss were ftle to Night; Four fixed, and the Fifth did whirl about The other Four, &c. (4.) Firfi Part of HENR VI, pag. Z4.,My Thoughts are whirled like a !Potter's WheeL (5.) TITUS ANDRONICUS, pag. 486.,To calm this Teipeft whirling in the Curst. (6.) And again, pag. 5oz2,And thei I'll come and be thy WFaggoaert, Anid whirl along with thee about the Globes: (7.) And uoxtonvs and CP.EDsrn, pag. y8.,I'm giddy; Expeilation whirls me round. In all which PafTages whirl ignifies agitating, turning round, in a vehement and giddy Manner.,XXXIV. Ibid. Page 374. WE come now to a Speech towards the Conclu1iin of this Faie p;,,t At, which labours under so many Faults of Pointing, as well arnd E. as some of Language, that the Sense is very much perplex'd, and the Text false both in Meaning and Grammar. I must transcribe the Whole first, as it stands; and then give it entire with its Corredions.,K But
-------- But come, Here as before, never ] fJo help you Mercy [ ] [(] How- frange or odd foe'er I bear my Jelf, [] As I perchace hereafter shall think meet To put an aztick 'Disposition on ] ) That you [] at ficbh Time feeing me, never shall ] With Arms etncumber'd thus, or this head-fhake [; ] Or by pironouncing of some doubtful Phrase [;] As [ ] well, --- we know, - - or, we could, and if we would - - Or, if we lift to speak, -- or, there be and if there might --- Or fich ambiguous giving out [ ] TO NOTE, That you know ought of me; this. do ye swear [..] So grace and mercy atyour imof need help you. Whoever will take this Speech-afunder, and examine the Struc- ture and Conneftion of it, will easily find that something is wanting to support the Sense and Grammar of the Whole. HAElLET is conjuring them to a Repetition of. their Oath of Secrecy, as to what they knew concerning the Walking of his Father's Spirit. Let's dismount it from the Verse, and fee what we can make of the Passage, as the Sense plainly will lead us. Here, as before, fays he, you ll all firear (Jo Mercy help you!) that, however oddly I flall think fit to carry myself, you feeing me Jo transformrd, never shall --- (by Motions, Shruggs, or any am- biguous Giving out to note,) --- that you know any Thing of me. This is the whole Scope, in Miniature, of this Paflage; and now for the Syntax of it. Never /hall --- do what ? The Verb is manifefily wanting, and the Sense consequently defedive. Then, why, ambiguous Giving out to note ? Does not, ambiguous Giving out, comprehend all the Poet intends here, without Words in the Tail to clog the Clearness of his Meaning? In Ihort, it is necefary, to make the whole intelligible, to point and corred it thus:,But
--..----- But come; Here as before, Never, - - - So help you Mercy ! How frange or odd foe'er I bear myfei, (As I, perchance, hereafter shall think fit To put an antick 5DifpoJition on: ) That you, at fnch time feeing me, never shall (With Arms encumber'd thus, or this Head-fhake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtfitl Phrase, As, well, - - we know - - - or, we could, tndif we would - - - Or, if we lift to jfeak, . - - or, there be, and if there might - - Or fich ambiguous Giving out;) D EN 0 T E That you know aught of me. This do you swear; So Grace and Mercy at your moif Need help you This small Change of two Letters not only gives us a Verb that makes the whole Tenour of the Speech clear and intelligible; but a Verb too, that carries the very Force and Sense which we before wanted in this Place. To denote, as very raw Grammarians know, implies, to signify, to flJer by Marks: And thus it is usual with our Pqet to employ this veryWord. So in OTHELLO, pag. 540.,Othell. 0 moijrous ! monfirrous ! Jago. ------- This was but bis )Dream. Othell. But it DENOTED a fore-gone Conclirion. And so HAMLET, in a Speech to his Mother, upon the Nature of his Grief for his Father's Death, pag. 3 54.,'Tis not alone my inky Cloak, good Mother, Nor cuflomary Suits of solemn Black, Nor windy Sufjiration of forc'd Breath, No, nor the fruitful River in the Eye, Nor the dejected 'Haviour of the ;ifage, Together with all Forms, Moods, She-ws -of Grief, That can DENOTE me truly.,-z K I
I HAVE, at length, got through the first AA of this Trage- dy; and hope, as well for the Ease of my Readers as my self, that, in the remaining Parts, Faults will neither rife so nume- rous, nor require so much Prolixity in the grubbing up. The Proofs of several Kinds, which I have already given to main- tain any Correcdion, must naturally save some Trouble in what is to follow: And I am sufficiently aware what Room my APPENDIX will demand; in which I have engaged to fliew, that the fame Sorts of Errors are scattered through the other Plays; and that SHAKESPEARE is to be reftor'd to his genuine Reading, with the fame Method and Ease of Cure.,XXXV. Ad. 2. Scene i. Page 376. s5-7 p~"-' POLoIFus, about to dispatch his Servant Reynoldo for France c,;:--:! with Commands to his Son Laertes, bids him, before he makes Em;-a;on his Visit, sirs enquire into his Son's Characer; and the better,to iift into it, commissions him to lay ieveral Levities to his Charge; (such as are usual with Youth, but none so rank in. Quality, as might discredit him;) as Gaming, Drinking, Fen- cing, Swearing, Quarrelling, Drabbing. Reynolo objecing, that, to accuse him of Drabbing, might difhibnour him, Polo- nius replies;,Faith [] no [,] as you may season it in the charge;. Ton muf Eotput ANOTHER Scandal on him. That he is open to incontinency, That's not my Aleaning; ---- The old Gentleman, 'tis plain, is of Opinion, that to charge his Son with wenching would not diflhonour him, consequently would be no Scandal to him: For every Scandal, in such De- gree as it assets any Man, proportionably dishonours him. Why then flould he caution Reyoldo from putting ANOTHER Scandal on him ? Methinks, there is some Reason to fufpea this Word of not being altogether so proper here, if no Scandal at all had been yet offer'd. There can be no.Second Scandal,supposed
supposed, without a Firfi implied. The Poet's Meaning is, as I conceive it, simply this: To fay, that he wenches, without Aggravation in the Circumstances, lays but a venial Liberty of Youth at his Door; but to fay, That he is open and addi&Eed to Incontinency, amounts to an Habit of Licence, and throws an aaual Scandal. A very flight Change will reconcile the Pas- sage to this Sense; and therefore, if I am right in the Author's Meaning, we may suppose he wrote;,No, faith; asyou may eas'n it in the Charge; Toau mufi notput A N U T T ER Scandal on him, That he is open to Incontinency, That's not my Meaning; but breath his Faults so quaintly, That they may seem the Taints of Liberty; i. e. So far from their being an absolute, entire, and utter Scan; dal to him, that they may be none at all, but appear at worst the Liberties of Youth.,XXXVI. Ibid.,Emendation, - ..---.. Marry3 Sir, here's my IDrift; from Yarions And I believe it is a Fetch of W I T. R'adig. THERE is a various Reading upon this Pafage; which defer- ved the Notice of the Editor; because, if I am not much de- ceived, it seems to have the 'genuine Stamp of our Author upon it. The second Edition in Folio, and some other of the Impreflions, read;,A.nd, I believe, it is a Fetch of WARRA N T. Which I take to be the very Words and Meaning of the Poet for this Reason, because he makes Polonius speak dubiously of his Intention. No body is so doubtful. of his own Judgment and Talents, but that he knows absolutely whether his Drifts and Purposes are designed with Wit, or, no, the he cannot be so,certain
certain, as to their being jtftifiable. A Man may much easier be mistaken, as to the Legality, than as to the Sagacity, of any FaE; because something more than private Opinion, or naked Belief, is wanting to determine positively whether a Thing be warrantable. Besides, I observe, that it is very familiar with SHAKESPEARE to use the Words Warrant and Warranty to figni- fy a Justification. So, (I.) OTHELLO, pag. 484.,I therefore apprehend, and do attach Thee, For an Abuser of the IYorld, a Practiser Of Arts inhibited, and out of Warrant, (z.) TITUS ANDRONICUS, pag. 509.,A Reason mighty, Jfrong, and effectal, A Pattern, Precedent, and lively Warrant, For me, mofl wretched, to perform the Like. (3.) King YOHN, pag. 176.,It is the Cnrfe of Kings to be attended By Slaves, that take their Humours for a Warrant, To break into the bloody Houre of Life. (4.) And again, pag. I89.,Look, where the holy Legate cones apace, To give us Warrant from the Hand of Heav'u. (5.) JEW of VENICE, pag. 9.,A.nd from )our Love I have a Warranty T' n;burthen all my Tlots and Turpofes, &c. (6.) And OTHELLO, pag. 580.,-n-----. never lov'd CaEfo, But with fich general Warranty of Heav'i As I might love. Not
Not, Warrantry; as it is in this las- Place erroneously printed co,,fm,1 in Mr. POPE'S Edition.,XXXVII. Ibid. Tou laying thefte flight SALLIES on my Son, Correamio, As 'twere a thing a little foild i' t' working, Roading 'Tis true, Sallies-and Flights of Youth are very frequent Phrases; but what Agreement is there betwixt the Metaphors of Sallies, and a Thing foil'd? CorreEt, as all the Editions, that I have ever seen, have it;,Tou laying thef Jflight SULLIES on my Son, Perhaps, this Sucflantive may be of his own coining, from the rerb to fully: But that, as I have already amply prov'd, is a Liberty which he eternally assumes through his whole Works.,XXXVIII. Ad 2. Scene 4. Page 38I. CORNELIUS and Foltimand, being returned from their Embaf- Cojajr4 fy to Norway, bring Word, that That Monarch had fupprefs'd fR'.aV his Nephew Fortinbras's Expedition; which he at firfi supposed designed against Poland, but found, upon Enquiry, to be le- vell'd at Denmark: That he had put Fortinbras under Arrest, who had obey'd it; and, upon a Check receiv'd, had made Pro- teftation before his Uncle never more to make any hostile At- tempts against the Danieh State.,jYhereon old Norway, overcome wibh Joy, Gives him.T HR EE thoutfand Crowns in annual Fee-; And his ConmifOion to enploy those Soldiers, So levied as before, againt the Polack.,So,
So, indeed, the Generality of the Editions read; but my two Qtarto's, of 1637 and 1703, both have it;,Whereon old Norway, overcome vwtitb Joy, Gives him THREESCORE thoisand Crowns in annual Fee, &c. This Addition of a Syllable gives a little Roughness to the Be- ginning of the Verse; but one Syllable in the firif Foot of it mufl be refolv'd in the Pronunciation; which is very usual, as I have obferv'd, with our Poet. 'Tis true, this Alteration is of no Moment to the Sense of the Paflage; but, methinks, Threeficore thousand Crowns are a much more suitable Donative from a King to his own Nephew, and the General of an Ar- my, than so poor a Pittance as Three thousand Crowns, a Pen- lioa scarce large enough for a dependant Courtier.,XXXIX. Ibid. Page 382. C:-.:, :7TThat He is mad 'tis true; 'tis true, 'tis pity; R:-'. And pity, it is true: ---,Thus, indeed, several of the Editions read this Place; but they don't seem to enter entirely into the Poet's Humour. Polonius, (an officious, impertinent, old Courtier,) priding himself in the Discovery which he supposes he has made of the Cause of HAMLET'S MadnesC, is so full of the Merit of it, that he can't content himself to deliver it in a plain and easy Manner; but falls into an affe&ed jingling Sort of Oratory, as he fancies; and ringing the Chimes, backwards and forwards, upon the fame Words. No Body can read this Speech without observing, that these Figures and Flowers ofRhetorick are not only sprinkled, but poured out, through the whole. They are Strokes of low Humour, thrown in purposely, ad captandum popdtlumj or, to use the Poet's own Phrase, to set om fore ~antity of barren SpJ:.tors to laugh at. I think, therefore, it should be wrote,,as
as three of my Editions have it; and as I know it is .confantly pronounc'd on the Stage:,That hie ia.J, 'tis true.; 'tis tre, :sis 'f.t; And sPity 'tis, 'tis true.,XL. Ibid. For this ejfg ,defecive [,1] contes by ffe [, ] False Point Either the Comma after defeEfive must be taken out, or another added before it; otherwise, the Sttbflantive is disjoined from its Verb. Reflore it,,,or thisEffeel, &lefeiive, eoqes by Cause,XLI. Ibid. Page 384. Into the Madniies ,whereint 1ow her4Zves, . CrreSiao,from Vario#; And all we wail fjr. Reading.. King. Do you think [ ] this ? Queen. --------- It may be very likely. POLONIUS having explainrd to them the-Nature of /HAMLET'S Lunacy, and from what Cause he imagines it ,to have sprung; the King asks the Queen, if lhe is of Opinion that it had such a 'Rife; which, 1he confefles, seems very probable to her that it might. Restore, therefore, as all my Editions have it. King. D' you think 'tis This? Queen. -------- It may &c.,XLII. Ibid. Take this from this, if this be otherwise [,] taPo POLONIUS thinks himself so certain of being right in his Dif- covery, that he is willing the King ihould take his Head from,L his
his Shoulders, if he is out in his Politicks. It must be point- ed;,Take This from This, - - - if This be otherwise;,XLIIL Ibid. -- ...... If he love her not, And be not from his reason faPn thereon,. Let me be no a2fflantfor a slate, AND keep a farm and carters. Instead of the Copulative AND, which does not make the Sense so clear, my two )uarto Editions read it, I think, better, with. a Conjunition disjuntEive.,-- - --- If he love her not, And be not- fior his Reafon-fall' thereon, Let me be no AflIftantfor a State,. BUT keep a Farm and Carters.. XLISV Ad 2. Scene 6. Page 391. Eti.on. These are. now the FASHION, andfo berattle the common STAGES,(o they call' them,) that many wearrig rapiers are afraid of goose- quills, and dare f-arce come thither. I'll give the Reading first as I think it ought to be reftor'd, and then assign the Reasons.,These now are the FACTION, and so berattle the common STAGERS,(so they call them,) that Alany wearing Rapiers are afraid of Goofe-qills, and dare scarce come thither. The Poet, as it were, here fleps out of Denmark into> England, and makes Ro encrausi in talking of Theatres, allude to the Plays,per-
performed at home by the Children of the King's Chappel; who were in great Eifimation at that Time of day, and out-rival'd the Gentlemen of the Profefion. The Variation of Fahlion into FaEtion we owe to Mr. HUGHS; I think it much the more for- cible and expressive Term: implying, that those Children were not only in Falhion and Esteem ; but were a Prevailing Fation against the other Playhouses, or had a Fadion made by the Town in their Favour. As to the other Alteration of common Stages into common Stagers, which is a Conjecure of my own, my Reason for it is this: The Poet certainly cannot intend by his Many wearing Rapiers, that Gentlemen-Specators were afraid to go to the common Theatres, for Fear of the Resentment of these Children, who so berattled the common Stages. What greater Affront could SHAKESPEARE put upon his Audience, than to suppose any of them were of such tame and cowardly Spirits ? No, if I underhand him, he seems to me to hint, that this young Fry were so pert upon the profeft Aóors, that even they, tho' they wore Swords, were afraid of going near them, least they mhould bebanter'd, or insulted, pall Sufferance. What far- ther induces me to think, it should be common Stagers, rather than common Stages, is, that, in the Speech immediately following, HAMLET, speaking of there Children, retorts upon them, - - - If theyflJould grow themselves to common PLAYERS - - - and does not fay, If they Ihould come themselves to the common PLAY- HOUSES, or Stages.,XLV. Ibid. What, are they Children? who maintains them ? how are they ejcoted? FaF Point-,will they purfiue the quality no longer than they can ing ? will they not fay afterwards, if they should grow themtelves to common play- ers [?] [ ] as it is moJl like, if their Means are no better: r ] their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim againfl their own Succefion [. ],L 2 The
The Pointing of the latter Part of this Speech is so very faulty, that the Sense of it is but barely intelligible. Restore it, as Mr. HOtGHS'S Edition partly leads the way;,1Will they not fay afterwards, if they shold grow themselves to com.,pmn Players, (as it is mofl like, if their Means are not better;) their Writers do them '. rong to make them exclaim againJ- their own Stccef? on? I cannot help observing, that the Beginning of this Speech con- tains one of those Passages in which the Poet may be said to over- shoot himself; andbe guilty of an Absurdity, by making his A&lor iay what he cannot be supposed to know in CharaEter Which is confounding the Pefion of the Drama with a Poeta loquitur. HAiLET, replying to Rofencraus concerning these young Players, afkc, -- IWhat, are they Children? who maitains them? how are they escoted? These Questions argue him a Stranger to them, and their Quality: Yet, without anyInformation, heimmediate- ly after cries, Iill theypnrfue the Quality no longer thant they car firg ? --- which is intimating tacitly, as I take it, that, he knew them to be the Singing-Boys of the King's Chappel: a Know- ledge, no ways to be accounted for, as I can imagine, unless the Poet had given his HA.ILET a Portion of Sir John Fafaffe's lsTiNCT. I must ownr, SHAKESPE4AR is not without some more Samples of these Self-Contradidions; and one Great one, that has been generally imputed to him, will fall under Confi- deration in the next Ad. But of That in its own Place.,XLVI. Ibid. C-,jezrc. Faith) there has been much to do on both fides; and the Nation holds,it no s/i, to tarre them [ ] to controzerre. I think it will be more numerous to the Ear, and, perhaps, re- quifite in point of Language, to read;,- - - -And the Nation holds it no Sin to tarre them on to Controverfe.,To
To tarre on is an old ENGLISH Word, signifying, toprovoke, urge on, Jet on, as we do Dogs to fighting. And so, I observe, SHAKESPEARE in other Passages writes it. King JOHN, pag. I69.,And like a 5Dog, that is compell'd to fight, Snatch at his Maifer that doth tarre him on. And, so again, in TROILUS and CRESSIDA, pag. 32.,Two Curs shall tame each other; Pride alone MJfl tarre the Maftives on, as 'twere their Bone. XLVII. Ad 2. Scene 7. Page 391. I will propheJie, he cotnes to tell me of the Players [. Mark it [, ] Falf Poist- you fjy right, Sir; This ought to be pointed as in Mr. HUGHS'S Imprefflon.,I will propheJfe, he comes to tell me of the Players; Mark it: ---,Tou fJay right, Sir;,XLVIII. Ibid. Page 392. I remember one said, there was No salts in the lines, to make the Var;oi Ru,ding, and 0-. matter fiavoury; nor no matter in the phrase, that might indite m:ffionr- the author of AFFECTION; but' cal'd it, an honeji method. ly- I must own, I can have no tolerable Comprehension of what is meant here by the Word Affection: HAMLET is fpeakingof some Play, to the Stroling Players, which he liked very well, but which did not so currently go down with the Multitude. One, it ,seems, who had a Mind to make a Criticism upon it,. hints, That there was no Matter in its Phrase that could indite the Author of Affecion. Now, what can Affe ion, as a Quality with regard to a Play, signify, but Passion? Yet surely the,Author
Author could not intend to mean that it wanted That. HAMILET speaks to the Maiter-Player to give him a Taste of his Quality in a pafionate Speech; direds him to a Tragedy, which he fays, in his Judgment was an excellent Play, wvell digefled in the Scenes, and let down with as imuch Modefly as Cunning: And then points out a Speech in it, which he chiefly loved, and which contain- ed the Account of Priam's slaughter, and the Distress of Hecuba at the Sight of that terrible Adion. The Subjet alone, never so inartificially told, certainly could not be altogether divested of Pafion. Besides, Could not the Phrase of a Play carry Pas- Pfon with its and yet the Poet use an hone2s Method ? The fe- cond Folio Edition (which, in the Generality, is esteemed as the best Impreflion of SHAKESPEARE;) has a different Reading, which, at least, deferred a flight Notice from the Editor: And which, I believe, is more likely to express our Author's Mean- ing. We, there, find it written thus;,I remeiber, one/aid, there was no Sallets (which Mr. POPE very,justly restores to, Salts) in the Lines to make the Matter Javowuy ; nor no Matter in the bhrafe, that might indite the iuthor of AFFECTATION; but call'd it an honefl Method. i. e.if I underfand it at all, That as there was no Poinancy of J1t or Virulence of Satire, on the one hand; so there was Nothing to condemn it of Affegation, on the other. And if it wanted Affleation, the Poet might more properly be said to use an honefi Method: For Affeftation, is either the Masquerade of Nature in an Habit of Ridicule; or the Abuse of it, by a de- jign'd Disguise of a worse Sort. Three of my Editions (the oldest of which is the Qtarto in I 63 7 ;) exhibit this Passage with an Addition in its Close; which tho' I can't warrant to be the Author's own genuine Words, yet make the Sentence end more roundly, and therefore might have been degraded, at least, to the Bottom of Mr. POPE'S Page, and been noted as an Interpo- lation of the Stage, as, perhaps, indeed they may be. The Words however are these.,--- But
.· .* But called it an hones Mlethod, as wholesome as fieet; and, by very much, more handjome than sue.,XLIX Ibid. Page 393. 4Ad thus o'er-cifed with coagulate gore, Fly Pr'it- It must be reflored with the second Folio Edition, and some of the more modem Ones,,And thus o'er-fized with coagulate Gore,. For the Glue, or Composition used by Plaifterers, Painters, &c. is called Side, and derived from the Sifa of the Italians.,L. Ibid. -.......... unequal MATCH'D, am; Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage fJrikes wide; But with the whif and wind. of his fell Sword 7T' unnervedfather falls [. ] THEN SENSELESS [ ] Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his baJfe &c. In the first Place, unequal matched by the Position mufl be a Nominative, and consequently relate to Pyrrhus. Now if' Pyrrhus was unequal matched, in the Sense and-general Accep- tation we muff underhand that hewas over-match'd, and had' the worf of it: Not that he was an Over-match for Priam, which was the Truth of the Fa&; I believe therefore it should be, as the second folio Edition has it, ( and the Imprefflon, said to be revised by Mr. ROYE, whether by Chance or De-- sign;) with an Alteration in the Pointing,-..- - -.- Vnequal MATCH !,For.
For the Substantive thus, with a Note of Admiration after it, relates indifferently to Pyrrihus and Priam, and signifies that each was unequal to the other, the first in Strength, the latter in Weakness. But to go lower into the Passage, (tho' all the Edi- tions agree in the Reading,) I can hardly be perfwaded it is printed as the Poet intended it; or that he would have indus- trioufly chosen to prefix an Epithet to ILrUM, which makes a Paradox in the Context. If Ilium was then fenfelefi, why Ihould it seem to feel the Blow ? Or, if Ilim was senseless, wrhy ihould it then seem to feel it ? For one of the two Ways it mufl be taken. I know very well it may be xefolved thus; that Ilium, quoad theBricks and stones, was absolutely senseless yet the Buildings falling into the Fire just at the Infiant when Priam fell to the Ground, seemed, as it were, to be sensible of that Blow. I confess, thismay be a poetical Inference; but a little hard-ftrained, and in no wife neceflary. Perhaps, with a small Variation in the Test and Pointing, the Passage may lie more easy and natural thus.,-------. Vnequal Match Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in Rage firikes wide; B-ut sith the Whif and Wind of his fell Sword ThVnnerved Father falls DOWN SENSELESS. --- Ilium, Seeming to feel this Blow with flaming Top Stoops to his Base, &c. I propose this last Alteration but as a Conjeture; and without laying any Stress upon it: and the rather too, because, per- haps, the whole Paflage concerning Priam and Hecuba may not be of our Poet's writing, but a Quotation from some Play of a Contemporary, which he had a mind to put in the Mouth of a firoling Player. I should, indeed, fufped it to be our Poet's from one Reason only; and that is, from its Subjec. I think the Observation has never yet been made, and therefore I shall -give it here; That there is scarce a Play throughout all his Works, in which it was possible to introduce the Mention of,them,
them, where he has not by Simile, Allusion, or otherwise, hinted at the Trojan Affairs; so fond was he of that Story.,LI. Ibid. But as we often fee-againfl some /form, Enicnd.tio. A fence in the heav'n, the RACK fiand flill, The bold windfpeechlefsi and the orb below As huif as death; Tho' all the Editions, that have fallen in my Way, write this Passage as the Editor does; I know no Sense, in which the Word Rack is ever used, that will serve the Purpose here. It must cer- tainly be corrected,,A Silence in the Heav'n, the WRACK fland flill, i. e. the Tempest; the Hurry, Confusion, and Outrage of the 0,,cafion Elements: And so, in this admirable Passage of the TEMPEST, Emendation p. 60.,-------.. Those our Alors, As I foretold you, were all Spirits, aid Are melted into Air, into thin Air; And, like the baseless Fabrick of their Vijon, :; The Cloud-capt Tow'rs, the gorgeous Palaces, T7e solemn Temples, the great Globe it fe/f, Tea, all which it inherit, shall difolve, And, like this intfibfantial Tageant faded, Leave not a RACK behind! It must be corre&ed; -,Leave not a WRACK behind! i. e. if I conceive the Poet's Meaning rightly; not a Fragment, or minutefi Particle, to ihew that a Wrack has been.,M LII.
LII. Ibid. Page 395. 1-r::-; Look IF he has not turi'd his Color, and has Tears in's Eyes. -,Pry'thee no more. All the Editions, that I have ever met with, read;,Look, W HERE he has not turn'd his Colour, and has Tears,in's Eyes. Trythee, no more. i. e. Look, whether he has not, &c. 'Tis true, as Mr. POPE writes it, the fame Sense is convey'd; but the other is the Poet's Word: And it is frequent with him, tho' the Editor did not remember it here, to use it in that Signification. So in the Second Part of HENRT VI. pag. 6 2.,Aid therefire do they cry, tho' yo' forbid, That they will guard you where Ton will, or no. And again, pag. I68.,Died he not in his Bed? where fbould he die ? Can I make Men live where they will, or no ? As, in these Instances, (and, perhaps, where ever else it occurs in our Author;) the Strifnefs of the Numbers requires a single SyI]ble in the Place where this Word stands, it may be, it is used by Contraf.ion only, for wheher.,LIII. Ibid. Page 395. F,-Pr.:- After yor death, you were better have a bad epitaph, then their,LS:^ ~ ill report while you liv'd.,This is only a flight literal Fault of the Press, and the Reviser. Corret it, as it ought to be,,After
Afteryour 'Death you were bettr' have a bad Epitaph, than their,ill Report while you live. THE next, with which my Remarks on this At conclude, is a Slip of such a kind, that I'don'tsknow to whose Account, properly, to place it. There are many Passages of such intole- rable Carelessness interfpers'd thro' all the fix Volumes, that, were not a few of Mr. PoPE's Notes fcatter'd here and there too, I Ihould be induced to believe that the Words in the Title Page of theFirfiJVolume,.-- COLLATED, and CORRECTED by the former EDITIONS, By Mr. POPE,-- -- were plac'd there by the Bookseller to enhaunce the Credit of his Edition; but that he had play'd false with his Editor, and never sent him the Sheets to revise. And, surely, this imuf have been the Cafe Sometimes: For no Body shall perfwade me that Mr. POPE could be awake, and with his Eyes open, and revising a Book which was to be publifh'd under his Name, yet let an Error, like the following, escape his Observation and Corretion.,LIV. AMc 2. Scene 8. Page 397. For mnrther, tho' it have no Tongue, will speak Cr,.nC, With mos miraculous Organ. I'll OBSERVE HIS LOOKS, Play something like the murther of my father Before mine uncle. I'll observe hls Looks, I'll tent him to the quick ; if he but blench, 1 know my course. This is palpable Nonsense, from an Error in the Comnpofitor to the Press; occafion'd by his throwing his Eye two Lines lower than he Ihould have done, and so printing the fame Hemiifich twice over. This Error could not be repeated by an Editor in revising, his Eye and Attention going together in that Task: This, therefore, must be one ofthofe Sheets, which, as I before hinted, were never sent to Mr. POPE for his Revisal. Restore,M 2 it,
it, as the Meaning of the Place requires, and as all the former Editions have it;,For Murther, the' it have no Tongue, willfpeak frith msjf miraculous Organ. I'll HAVE THESE PLAYERS °Play something like the 3lurther of ny Father Before mine 'uck. I'll oberve his Looks; I'll tent him to the ,ic k; if he look pale, I kn:o myy Cotfie. But because it may seem a little too hard, upon a tingle In- fiance of this kind, to fufpea that the Sheets might not be all revised by the Editor, as I just now hinted; I'll subjoin an- other flagrant Testimony of the fame Sort of Negligence: And I ihall do it the more willingly, because I would embrace an Opportunity of clearing Brutus from the Imputation of a Mur- ther, which SHAKESPEARE is made to throw upon him, tho' he never had it in his Head to think him guilty of it.,TYILLIAM de la Poole, the wicked Duke of Suffolk, being banish-. ed out of England by King Henty the Sixth, as he is making off in Disguise, is upon the Coast of Kent taken by Pirates: And behaving himself to them in a Manner they did not care to brook, was ordered to the long Boat's Side, there to have his Head firook off. As he is dragging away, he comforts himself that his Death will be memorable, from the Circumfance of his being murther'd by such mean and vile Fellows; as it had. happen'd to many Great Men before him. Second Part of HEN' r VI. pag. 173. Omnca That this my death may never be forgot.,Great men oft die by vile Bezonians. A Roman fv-order and Bandettoflave Murther'd feet Tully. Brutus' bafJard hand Pompey the Great; and Suffolk dies by pirates.,Tully
Tully indeed was kill'd by Herennius a Centurion, whom the Poet here calls, by way of Ignominy, a Roman Sworder; and by Popilius a Tribune, who is likewise here call'd a Bandetta Slave, probably, because he had formerly murthered his Father, and was defended, upon his Tryal for that Fad, by Tully. But would not any Body now, taking Mr. POPE's for a corrcEt and infallible Edition, begin to wonder how SHAKESPEARE could be so precise in Roman History as to the Death of Cicero; and so ignorant, as to lay the Murther of Pompey upon Brutus ? If we were to take this Fa& for granted, we should find our Poet guilty of a strange Self-Contradi&ion, or Pompey the Fa- ther of a very degenerate Son. For Sextus Pompeius, in ano- ther of our Author's Plays, gives Brutus such a Charadter and Commendations, as no Man certainly would bestow on his Fa- ther's Murtherer. See AN THON r and CLEOPA TRA, pag. 34 .,-.---- ----- 1 do not know, JYherefore ny Father should Revengers want, Having a Son and Friends; since Julius Csear, (WhIo at Philippi the GOOD Brutus ghofed,) There saw you labring for him. Ifhat was it That mov'dpale Caflius to conftjire ? And what Made thee ALL-HONOUR'D, HONEST Roman Brutus, With the arm'd reft, Courtiers of beauteous Freedom.r To drench the Capitol, but that they would Have but one man, a man? And that is it Hath made me rig my Navy: At whore Burthet The anger'd Ocean foams, with which I meant To courge th' Ingratitude that defiteful Rome Calf on ny noble Father. The Sentiments of filial Piety, and Resolutions of avenging his Father's Murther, are too itrongly exprefs'd, to suppose he would in the fame Breath bestow an Encomium on the Man who kill'd,- him
o: .': him. But when I first quoted this Passage, I little fufpe&ed,it would have furnithed frelh Work for Corretion. What! were the Confpirarors presumed to have kill'd CASSAR, becaulfe tbLy would have but one MIan, a Man? What Mock-reafoning ,is this ? If they would have but one an;a, a tman, (i. e. a Man am' i;:;.- a Man eminent above, and over-topping, all others;) it was the Height of char's Ambition to be such a One, and therefore they should rather have let him live. If I underhtand the Meaning of the Poet, he would infer, that the noble Confpi- rators ilabb'd C.far, because they would have, or susser, any one Man to be but a Llan; i. e. they would have no one aim at arbitrary Power, and a Degree of Preheminence above the reft. Restore the Place therefore with the second Folio Edition;,------------.-- ut that they w'ould Have One Man, but a Man ? -But to return again to the Question of Pompey being kill'd by Brutus. I have before hinted, that our Poet never defign'd a Charge of this fort against poor Brutrus; and in short, SHAKE- SPEARE will presently stand acquitted of this Blunder; and the Fault appear to have arisen from a Negligence of Revisal, or rather from the \ant of revij:ig at all. But that this Suspicion of mine may not appear a meer gr.its dicum, I'll now give the Reason that induced me to it; and from which, I think, the Source of the Error may be fairly accounted for. The, Cafe is, a Material Lineis left out, in this Passage, by Mr. POPE'S Impression; which very Line is left out of another Edition, in Duodecimo, likewise publifi'd by Mr. Tonfon about ten Years ago; so that it seems most probable, that the Press was set to Work and corrected by this Duodecimo Edition; without any Collation with the old Editions mentioned in Mr. POPE'S Table of Editions at the End of his Sixth Volume. This Deduction, I am sure, is fair and natural: for the second folio Edition (one of the Editions there mentioned,) exhibits the Passage entire, and as the Poet wrote it: and even the fourth Edition in folio (-ahich, indeed, is but a faulty one;) printed no longer ago than,the
the Year I 68 , likewise has it as it {hould be. Restore it there- fore with them, and we come back both to the Truth of the History, and the Poet's Text into the Bargain.,That This my (Death may never be forgot. Great Men oft die by vile Bezonians. A Roman Sworder, and Bandetto Slave Mtirther'dfweet Tully. Brutus' baflard Hand STAB'D Julius Cxfar. SAVAGE ISLANDERS Pompey the Great: And Suffolk dies by Pirates. I cannot help, tho' this Passage has already taken up some or,.a Length, throwing in an Explication upon it, which will benew tofome Readers, atleaft, of SHAKESPEARE: and, consequent- ly, I shall not lose all my Labour in it. I had once a Suspicion that the Poet intended to make Suffolk reproach Brutus with Cowardice, for dishonourably flabing CGfar; and that the Text, to support this Meaning, ihould have been alter'd to,--------- Brutus' DASTARD Hand Stab'd Julius Cefar: A Mistake of the like kind has happen'd upon the very fame Words in another of our Author's Plays. In King Richard II. Bolingbroke being required to throw down the Duke of Norfolk's Gage, and withdraw his own Challenge, refuses at first upon a point of Honour, and throws out this contemptuous Reflexion against the Duke.,Shall I seem crefl-fall'n in my Father's Sight? Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my Height, Before this ont-dared DASTARD? - -- Where some of the Editions erroneously express it,,Before this out-dared BASTARD? :--,But
But I have fnce found Reasons to retraE this Opinion, and to be convinced that the Poet, in calling Brutus BASTARD, designed a much deeper Contumely than That of Cowardice; zil. the blackest Ingratitude and most detestable Parricide SHAKESPEARE has elsewhere taken Notice of CGfar's exceflive Love to Birutus, and of the Ingratitude of the latter for being concern'd in his Murther. JULIUS C£.SAR, pig. 27I,,7Thro' This the well-beloved BR'VVS flabb'd, And, as he pluck'd his cursed Steel away, Mlark how the Blood of Cefar follow'd it! As robiing out of 'Doors to be refolv'd. If Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no: For BRVTh)S, as you know, was C, far's ANGEL. Judge, oh, jyo Gods, how dearly C/ESAR lov'd him Ti, his, Th was the unkindeft Cut of all; For when the noble Cafar saw Him flab, INGRATITUDE, more fjrong than Traytors Arms, -aite vanquif'd him; ---- But this amounts to no more than a positive Accusation againfi Brutus of Ingratitude, because CcJar lov'd him to that Degree. We know Nothing from hence of the Spring of Cfar's Affection, or why Brutus, even for assisting in his Murther, should be ftigmatiz'd with Baflardy. As this Piece of secret History is no whereelfe so much as hinted at, that I know of, or can recol- let, throughout all our Author's Works, I {hall give it from PLUTARCH in the Life of MARCUS BRUTUS. Clefar, before the great Battle of Pharfalia, had order'd his Commanders to spare Brutus, and. bring him safe to him, if he would willing- ly surrender himself: But if he made any Refifance, to sus- ser him to escape, rather than to kill him. " And this he " is believed to have done (fays the HISTORIAN,) out of a " Tenderness to Servilia, the Mother of Brultus : For Gefar,had
': had it seems, in his Youth, been very intimate with her, "and he passionately in Love with him. And confidering " that Brutus was born about that Time, in which their Loves,were at the highest, Cefar had some Reason to believe that he "was begot by him." --- This SHAKESPEARE knew, and therefore reviles Brutus with being the Baflardlflue of the Man whom he so ungratefully kill'd.,LV. Ad 3. Scene r. Page 399. Good Gentlemen, give him a further edge, R""im ' And drive his purpose INTO theef delights. But Two Speeches above, Rofencraus had informed the Queen, that there did seem a kind of Joy in Hamlet to hear of the Ac- tors Coming, and that they had already Orders to play before him: What Occasion, therefore, was there to drive his Purpose into these Delights ? He already feem'd to give into them; and the King desires Rofencraus and Guildenflern to promote and further that Bent and Disposition which Hamlet shew'd to that Sort of Pleasures. I think, therefore, the second Folio Edition expresses this Pafiage more rightly;,Good Gentlemen, give him a further Edge, And drive his Turpoft ON TO these sDelights. And so the Poet expresses himielf before in the second AS of this Play, where the King entreats Rofencraus and GuildenfJern, as old School-fellows of Hamlet, to flay a while at Court in or- der to divert him. See pag. 379.,---.--- --- I entreatyou Both, That being of o young )Days brought up with him, AJnd Jice so neighbour'd to his Touth and Humour, That Ton vouchJafe your Reft here in our Court Some little Time, so by your Companies To draw him ON TO Pleafieres, -----,N LVI.
LVI. Ac 3. Scene 2. Page 400. t1'--- CTo be, or not to be ? - -- That is the quef ion, ---,lhether 'tis nobler in the mind, to fiifer The flings and arrows of outrageous fortune; Or to take arms againfl a SEA of troubles, And by oppofig end them - -- - A late Eminent AuTHOR, I think, took the beginning of this noble Speech to Task, for employing too great a Diversity of Ietaphors, that have no Agreement with one another, nor any Propriety and Connexion in the Ideas. To take Arms againif a Sea, literally speaking, would be as unfeafible a Projec, as the Attempt (mentioned in a Speech of the Lord Haverflam, in a late Reign;) to flop the Tide at Gravesend with a Man's Thun.bm. Mlr. POPE subjoins a Note, that instead of a Sea of Troubles, it might have been --- perhaps, liege; which continues the Metaphor of flings, arrows, taking Arms; and represents the being encosiioped on all Sides with Troubles. The EDITOR is not the firfl who has had the fame Suspicion : And I may fay, be- cauie I am able to prove it by WVitneffes, it was a Guess of mine, before he had enter'd upon publilhing SHAKESPEARE. But, perhaps, the Correction may be, at belt, but a Gurefs; con- iidering the great Liberties that this Poet is observed to take, elsewhere, in his Diction, and Connexion of Aetaphors: And con- sidering too, that a Sea (amongst the antient Writers, sacred and prophane, in the Oriental, as well as the Greek and Latin, Tongues;) is used to signify not only the great, collected, Body of Waters which make the Ocean, but likewise a vast Quanti- ty, or Multitude, of any thing else. * The Prophet Jeremiah, particularly, in one Passage, calls a prodigious Army coming,up r £ . Schind'.eri Lex':. Pic:tl'.:: ;:ai ; Kircheri Conrr.a;i,ls VFteris TfIinervti; Bec- i3id-n e .;i Origi; Li?.er Lstiy.e ; Alrt:nii Lsexicon ilologicumli, &c.
up againff a City, a Sea. Chap. 51. 42. The Sea is come ip upon Babylon; ]fe is covered with the Multitude of the Waves thereof. So here, I conceive, to take Arms againfl a Sea of Troubles, is, figuratively, to bear up against the Troubles of human Life, which flow in upon us, and encompass us round, like a Sea.,BUT there is another Passage in this Soliloquy of HAMILET, which, I hinted, in my Remarks upon the last A&, would demand some Consideration in its proper Place; and, there- fore, it naturally falls in here.,But that the 2Dread of Something after TDeath ditionit!. (That undifcover'd Country, from whose Bourn 'P,,oex No Traveller returns ;) puzzles the IVill; And makes us rather bear those Ills we have, Than fly to Others that we know not of. The Criticks have, without the least Scruple, accused the Poet of Forgetfulness and Self-Contradiaion from this Passage; feeing that in this very Play he introduces a Charader from the other World, the Ghofi of HAMLET'S Father. I would not be so hardy to assert peremptorily, that SHAKESPEARE was aware of this seeming Absurdity, and despised it; any more than I would pretend to justify him against this Charge to all his Ob- jetors. If he foresaw any thing of it, perhaps, he lhelter'd himself from their Criticisms under some Reserve like this. 'Tis certain, to introduce a Ghofi, a Being from the other World, and to fay that no Traveller returns from those Confines, is, literally taken, as absolute a Contradiaion as can be sup- posed, &fasto & terminis. But we are to take Notice, that SHAKESPEARE brings his Ghost only from a middle State, or local Purgatory; a Prifon-houfe, as he makes his Spirit call it, where he was doom'd, for a Term only, to expiate his Sins of Nature. Bythe undiscovered Country, here mentioned, he may, perhaps, mean that lafi and eternal Residence of Souls in a State of full Bliss or Misery: which Spirits in a Middle State (either under Purgation, or in the Prisons of Hope, as, I think, oneof the APOSTLES calls them;) could not be acquainted with, or ex-,N z plain.
plain. So that, if any Latitude of Sense may be allow'd to the Poet's. Vords, tho' he admits the Possibility of a Spirit returning from the Dead, he yet holds that the State of. the Dead can- not be communicated, and, with that Allowance, it remains fill an zuntdifcovier'd Country. We are to observe too, that even his Ghost who comes, as I hinted above, from Purgatory, (or, what- ever else has been understood under that Denomination;) comes under Refiritions: And tho' he confesses himself subjet to a Vicissitude of Torments, yet he fays at the fame time, that he is forbid to tell the Secrets of his Prifon-hotfe. If these Qualifi. cations will not intitle the Poet to fay, that no Traveller re- turns from the Verge of the other World, i. e. to disclose any of its iyfteries, without a Contradiction to the Liberty he has taken of bringing Apparitions upon the Stage; it is all the Sal- To I can put in for him, and I must give him up to the Mer- cy of the Cavillers. The Antients had the fame Notions of our abstruse and twilight Knowledge of an After-Being. VALE- RuVS FLAccUs, I remember, (if I may be indulged in a ihort Digrefflon,) speaking of the lower Regions, andState of the Spirits there, has an Exprefion which, in one Sense, comes close to our AUTHOR'S undiscovered Country ; vi. --- Stperis incognita Tellus. And it is observable that VIRGIL, before he enters up- on a Description of Hell, and of the Elyflan Fields, implores the Permilion of the Infernal Deities, and professes, even then, to discover no more than Hear-Say concerning their Mysterious Dominions. VIRG. ,Eneid. VI.,Dii, quibus imperium eft Animarum, Umbreque silentes, Et Chaos, & Philegetlon, loca note tacentia late, Sit mihi fas ardita loqui, fit numine veflro Pandere res alr terri et caligine merfas. The Note of Dilnatus upon this Passage is very remarkable to our Poet's SubjeE: But That the Curious may refer to at their Ldfure. I SHALL conclude all I have to remark on this fine Soliloluy, when I have fubjoin'd an Explication to one Word; in whith, perhaps,,I may
I may take the Poet in a Meaning different from what the Gene- rality of his Readers underfiand him. But if my Singularity in this Point be juflify'd by a Reason, I hope it will secure me from the Censure of being idly Jingular. He is faying, That were it not for the Dread of an unknown State after this, who would bear the Plagues and Calamities here, when he could himself put an End to them, and his own Life too ? His Words are these;,For who would bear. the Whips, and Scorns of Time, Occasional,Gloss. IWhen as himself might his Quietus make With a bare BODKIN ? I know that the Poet is generally interpreted to mean in this Place, When we might give ourselves a Release by any, the leaf, Weapon of Offence that can be. 'Tis true, This exaggerates the Thought in that particular; but I can scarce suppose that hein- tended to descend to a Thought, that a Man might dispatch himself with a Bodkin, or little Implement with which Women separate, and twist over their Hair. I rather believe, the Poet designed the Word here to signify, according to the old Usage of it, a Dagger. Tho' the Glossaries give us no such Interpreta- tion, the use of an Old and Learned Poet, who may weigh against their Comments, I am sure will support me in it. CHAUCER, in his Monke's Tale, recounting the Murtherof 7tdlis Cefar, has this Stanza.,This Julius unto the Capitol weent, )pon a day, as he was wont to gone, And in the Capitol anon him hent This false Brutus, and his other fine, And flicked him with BODKINS arione WFith many a WIound, and thus they let him lie: But never grutch'd he at no fJroke but One, Or else at tz'o, tbt if his floy lie.,?Tis
'Tis plain, that the Poet here means Daggers by this Word: And no one ever yet thought that Brutus and Caflius, or any other of the Conspirators, stabb'd Cofar with their Ladies Bodkins.,LVII. Ac 3. Scene 6. Page 407. -:~ 'P:='- 'King. I have nothing witb this anfver, Hamlet, these words are,not mine. Haml. oATh, nor mine [n] ow, my Lord [. ] Tor play'd once i'th' 'Vni,verfrty, you fay ? _HAALET gives the King an abrupt, gruff, Anfiver; and im- mediately applies himself and his Discourse to Polonius. Cor- re& it therefore, as the second and fourth Folio Editions have it.,King. I have Nothing with this Anf.'er, Hamlet; theJe SWords are,/not mine. Hami. No, nor mine. -- TNow, ry Lord, --- Ton play'd once i't'.,'Vniverjity, )oru Jay ?,LVIII. Ibid. Page 408. O*--on -l Hami. Lady, fball Ilie in 5our Lap ?,Ophel. ANo, my Lord.,[ ] Haml. 'Do yov think I meant Country matters ! Certainly, H-AMLET's Answer is more natural, and less abrupt; if we restore this Paiage from the second folio Edition thus:,Hamrnl. Lady, ball I lie in your Lap? Ophel. ATo, my Lord. Haml. I mean, my Head upon your Lap? Ophel. Ay, my Lord. Haml. 'Do you think I meant Country Matters .,But
But, indeed, if ever the Poet deserved Whipping for low and indecent Ribaldry, it was for this Paflage ; ill-tim'd in all its Circumstances, and unbefitting the Dignity of his Charaters, as well as of his Audience.,LIX. Ad 3. Scene 7. Page 408. Enter a King and ,lteen very lovingly; the Zeeen embracing himn, Oinifior,and he her. [ ] He takes her tJp, and declines his Head 'Ply'd poonl her Lap. Mr. PoPE here makes the King, as we fay upon a different Oc- cafion, take her up, beforelhe's down. It must be reftor'd as the second folio Edition, and several others, rightly have it.,Enter I KIing and Zueen, very lovingly; the Queen embracing him,,and he her. She kneels, and makes Sliew of Proteflation unto him: He takes her up, and declines his Head n apo her Lap.,LX. Ibid. Page 410. .And women's fear and love hold quantity, Emenda.,tion. 'Tis either none, or in extremity ; Now what my love is, proof bath nade you know, And as my love is SIX'D, ny fear is so. So several of the Editions exhibit this Passage ; but, I think, the Sense of the Context {hews it to be wrong. My Qyarto Edition of 1637 has it;,Aid as my Love is CIZ'D, my Fear is so. And the Second folio Edition reads,,And as my Love is SIZ, my Fear is so.,Now;
Ionw, from these two mistaken Readings, and as the Queen evidently is talking here of the Quantity of her Love and Fear, their Proportion, not their Continuance or Duration, I am per- fwaded, the whole Pafage ought to be reftor'd thus;,And [omen's Fear and Love hold Quantity, 'Tis either None, or in Extremity ; NTow what niy Love is, Troof bath made you know, And as ny Love is SIZ'D, nmy Fear is so. i. e. As you know by Proof the Quantity of my Love; so my Fear for you is of the fame Size as my Love is.,LXI. Ibid. Page 412. K-zP= s- King. What do ou call the Play?,Haml. The Mouse-trap. Many, how? TOPICALLY.,This play is the image of a murther done in Vienna; Gonzago is the duke's ATame, his WYIFE Baptifta;,~c Corre&t it, as it ought to be.,King. WYbat do ou call the Play ? Haml. 7Te Mouse-trap. Marry how ? TROPICALLY.,This Play is the Image of a Murther done in Vienna; Gonzago is the )Duke's Name, his WIEE's Baptifta;,Wc. Well; immediately upon this enters Lucianus; and HAMLET, continuing his Relation, tellshis Uncle;,LXI.
LXII. Ibid. This is one Lucianus, nephew to the KING. Emendatiou. All the Editions whatever, 'tis true, concur in this Reading; and therefore we are to presume the Blunder was original, either in the Poet's Inadvertence, or the Miltake of the first Transcript. Nephew to what King ? The Story of the introduc'd Play is the Murther of Gongago, Duke of Vienna: As is plain from the preceding Part of this very Speech. It therefore ought to be correced, in Spight of all the printed Copies;,This is one Lucianus, Nephew to the DUKE. So, wherever the Player-King and Q!teen are mentioned, it ought to be DUKE and DUTCHESS. The Source of these Mirtakes is easily to be accounted for, from the Stage's Dref- sing of the Charaaers. Regal Coronets, perhaps, being by the Poet at first ordered for the Duke and Dutchess, the succeeding Players, who did not so firicly observe the Quality of the Characers and Circumfiances of the Story, mistook them for a King and Queen ; and so the Error was deduced down from thence to the present Times.,LXIII. Ibid. Ophel. Tonl are keen, tmy Lord, you are keen. Emendation; Haml. It would cost you a groaning, to take off my edge. Ophel. Still WORSE and worse. Haml. So you muft'take your Husbands. Surely, this is the moit uncomfortable Lesson that ever was preached to the poor Ladies: And I can't help wilhing, for our own fakes too, it mayn't be true. 'Tis too foul a Blot upon our Reputations, that every Husband that a Woman takes must be worse than her former. The Poet, I am pretty sure, intend-,o ed
ed no such Scandal upon the Sex. The Second and Fourth folio Editions, and the Qarnto of 1637, read the latter Part of this Dialogue thus.,Ophel. Still better and wofe. Haml. So you mistake Habamnds. lizftake, in the Last Line, runs thro' all the printed Copies, that I have ever seen, from the fecondfolio Edition downwards. ir. POPE, who very justly reflores the true Reading there, takes no manner of Notice of the Various Reading in the last Line but One: Tho', if I underhtand the Poet's Conceit at all, the whole Smartness of the Repartee depends uponit. I think, therefore, the entire Passage ought to stand thus.,Ophel. To2 are keen, mny Lord, you are keen. Haml. It -world cofi Torn a Groaning to take off mie Edge. Ophel. Still BETTER and WORSE. Haml. So you muf take your Husbandsr. In ihort, HAMfLET has been all along talking to the young Lady in double Etendre's, or, rather, in a Strain of Freedom which scarce admits of that nice Ditlinfion. She tells him once be- fore, that he's naught, and fle'll mark the Play. He still keeps up his Vein of Drolleiy, and throws in such plain Hints, that ihe is forced to parry them by an indirec Answer; and re- marks, as I conceive, that his Wit is smarter, tho' his Meaning is more blunt. This, I think, is the Sense of her --- Still bet- ter and worse, - - - and then there is some Reason and Acute- ness in HAM1LET's Anwver, So you mutl take your Husbands. For he certainly alludes to the Words in the Church-Service of MIatrimony, where the Husband and W ife promise alternately to take each other for BETTER, for WORSE; for richer, for poorer, &c.,LXIV.
LXIV. Ibid. Page 413. Ophel. The King rifes, Omission,[ I JTpl, ' Queen. How fares my Lord ? Polon. Give o'er the play. King. Give me some light, away. As Hamlet had thrown some apposite Lines into the Play, in Order to sift the King's Conscience as to the Fat of his Father's Murther, and was resolved to watch his Looks and Behaviour narrowly during the Representation; when the Scene comes to touch the Poyfoning in the Garden, and the King, itruck with the Image of his own Deed, caa set it out no longer, methinks; it is very improbable that Hamlet, upon this pleasing Stroke of Convi&ion, flould not express his Satisfaaion in one half-line at least, upon the Play having a proper Effefd, and his being convinced of his Uncle's Guilt. The Passage ought certainly to be supplied from the Second Folio Edition, and Three more inm- prefions now before me.,Ophel. The King rifes. Hraml. What, frighted with false Fire? Queen. How fares my Lord ? Polon. Give o'er the Play. King. Give me some Light, away.,LXV. Ad 3. Scene 8. Page 413s WVonld not this, Sir, and a forest of feathers, if the refi of my fortunes ConjCara,Emendation. turn Turk with me, with two provincial roses on my RAY'D Shoes, get me a fellowlip in a cry of players, Sir ? Hamlet, applauding himself upon the Discovery his additional Lines in the Play have made of his Uncle's Villany, asks Hora- tio, whether he does not think, that his Skill, and a few Thea-,0 trical
trical Equipments join'd with it, would not, upon a Shift, help him into a Share among the Players by their own Voices. But, what are we to understand by ray'd Shoes? Mr. POPE tells us, at the Bottom of his Page, that in some Books he had found it rac'd; in others, rack'd. 'Tis true; and no less than three Edi- tions that I know of, (viz. the Quarto's of 1637 and 1703, and Mr. Hugbs's Imprefion,) have it, ra'd : And all the four Readings, I believe, are equally mistaken ; tho' the last mention- ed, perhaps, will bring us nearest to the true one. 'Tis plain to me, Hamlet, from the Discovery that his Lines in the Play have extorted, is complimenting himself on his Tafie and Judg- ment in the Powers of Tragedy; and seems to think that he wants Nothing but a Stock of Plurmes, and Buskins, to set him up for one of the Profeflion. If this be the true Sense of the Passage, as I believe verily it is, I am apt to think the Poet wrote it thus.,Wzouldnot This, Sir, and a Forest of Feathers, if the reft of my For-,tunes turn Turk with -Ie, with two provincial Roses on myRAIS'D Shoes, get me a Felwrfhip in a Cry of Players, Sir By rais'd Shoes, as I take it, he means the Tragedy-Buskin, (or Cothurnus, as it was call'd by the Romans;) which was as much higher in the Heel than other common Shoes, as the Chioppines, worn by the Venetians, are, mention'd by our Poet in the fore- going AS of this Play. It was the known Cuflom of the Tra- gedians of Old, that they might the nearer resemble the Heroes they personated, to make themselves as tall in Stature, and, by an artificial Help to Sound, to speak as big, as they possibly could. But of this I shall have Occasion to speak more at large in the Difeitation to be prefix'd to my Translation of EscHTrLs's Tra- gedies. HORACE, in his short History of the Progress of the Stage. takes Notice of these two Things, as peculiar Supplements to Tragedy; ---magnmYnqle loqui, nitique Cothurno: And SHAKE- SPEARE himself, in his Troilus and Cressida, seems to rally the Acors both on Account of firetching their Voices and Persons,,(Pa1g. 24 ),And
Aid like a strutting Player, whorf Conceit Lies in his Ham-string, and doth think it rich To hear the wooden 2Dialogue, and Sound, 'Twixt his STRETCH'D FOOTING and the Scafoldage;,LXVI. Ibid. For thou dojl know, oh Damon dear, This realm diSmantled was Conjedurd',Emenda- Of Jove himself, and now reigns here tions.,A very very PEACOCK. The Generality of Editions have anotherReading, (which is, indeed, a corrupt one as printed,) but Mr. POPE has espoused This, and subjoined a Note for his Reason; that it alludes to a Fable of the Birds chufing a King, inflead of the Eagle, a Peacock. I suppose, the EDITOR must mean the Fable of Barlandus, in which it is said, the Birds, being weary of their State of Anar- chy, moved for the setting up of a King. The Peacock, on Ac- count of his gay Feathers, put in for the Office; and the Choice upon the Poll falling to him, a Pye stood up with this Speech in his Mouth; May it pelafe your Majefly, fays he, we fl7ould be glad to know, in CaJe the Eagle flould fall upon us in your Reign, as he has formerly done, how will you be able to de- fend us? But, with Submission, in this Passage of SHAKESPEARE, there is not the least Mention made of the Eagle, unless, by an uncommon Figure, yove himself llands in the Place of.his Bird. Then, we do not find that Hamlet intends tofpeak of his Uncle, as of a Person unable to defend the Realm; nor, indeed,. do we find that the Realm had been yet attack'd, or wanted a Defender. In ihort I think, Hamlet is here setting his Father'sand8 Uncle's Charaeers against each other; and means to fay, that by his Father's Death, the State was fiript ofa Godlike Monarch, in Ex- cellence rivalling Jove: And that now, in his stead, reign'd the most defpicablenimal that could be. I fay, thatHamlet intends a Compa- rifon betwixt his Father and his Uncle; or, at least, to speak greatly to the Disadvantage, and in Contempt of the latter. But the,Peacock,
Peacock, surely, is too fine a Bird to be thus degraded; tho' the Eagle has the Preference in Strength, Spirit, and Fierceness. Betides, what Features of Resemblance are there betwixt a tame Peacock, and a King, who had Courage enough to usurp a Crown, to make away with his own Brother to make way for himself, and to justle his Brother's Son, Hamlet, out of the Eletion, tho' he was a Favourite of the People ? ft. C;.:, WVere it necessary to suppose, that the Poet meant, Hamlet,ihould revile his Uncle here for a tame, cowifll Spirit, and as one inheriting none of the masculine Qualities of his Predecessor; the Change of a single Letter will give us this Sense, and a Word too that has the Warrant of our Poet, in another Place, to bear that Signification. I would then read,,.----------- and now reigns here A v-,vey, MEACOCK. Now a * aiot;R or Enoccf;, betides its proper Signification ofa cravenly Bird, is taken metaphorically to mean a daflardly effemi- rnre Fellow: And in that Acceptation we find it used in the T__INxG of the SHREW, pag. 312.,Oh, yot are ANovices; 'tis a WJorld to fee, Ho-o tame (wheen Men and IWomen are alone,) A MEACOCK iWretch can make the crrfteft Shrew. But not to fix ourfelres down absolutely to this Reading, let's sirs have Recourse to the various Reading in some of the Copies, and fee what Help we can derive from thence. The Second and Fourth Editions in Folio, the Quato of 1 63 7. and, if it be worth mentioning, the Duodecimo Impression, publih'd by Mr. Tonfon in 1714, allhaveit;,--..------. and now reigns here ·l rsaR JA very, ;e', PAJOCK.,I mull * S.k'inner's L1ex':: Esy!. in Meacocl. $Fdannex'$ LexkPr. Etyii~~v.dg. in eaz~ock;.
I must own,. I know no such Term; but there is one so very near it in Sound, and one which suits the Author's Meaning in Sense so aptly, that it is not improbable but he might writeori- ginally;,---.--.-- and now reighs here Second Co-;P,jeCture. A very, very, PADDOCK. Here you have the old Word itself which Minfhew derives from pnao, Bufo, a Toad. * Our Author was very well acquainted with the Word, and has used it more than once, or twice. In the First Witch-Scene of his Macbeth, we have these Words.,ft Witch. -------- I come, Grimalkin; 2d Witch. PADDOCK calls. Where the Haggs speak of the Screaming of the Cat, and the Croakingof the Toad, which they are supposed to hear from the Or- gans of their Familiars. But what makes it the more probable that this Term ihould be used here, Hamlet, again, afterwards, speaking of his Uncle to the Queen his Mother, among other contemptuous Additions, gives him this very Appellation of Paddock.,-.-.-...- 'Twere good, you let him know; For who, that's but a ieeen, fair, faber, wife, VWotddfrom a PADDOCK, from a Bat, a Gib, Such dear Concernisgs hide? But, again: If we will, with Mr. POPE, suppose, that thePoet 'ilrd Co?; alludes to the Eagle, and some inferior Bird in Quality that has got the Start of him; another small Variation from the Text will bring us to all we want for this Purpose. Why, then, might not the Poet make his Hamlet fay,,---.--- and now reigns here A very, very PUTTOCK.,~* ~dcm, in~l`~Padi. eadock. * tdcm, in' Paddock.
i. e. a ravenous Kite, a mere Bird of Prey; a Devourer of the State and People; without any of the Excellencies and defensive Virtues of the Royal Eagle, his Father ? Here again we have a Word, which the Poet was as well acquainted with, as with the two already quoted. Second Part of King HENRT VI. pag. 160.,Who finds the sPartridge in the PUTTOCK's Nej., But may imagine how the Bird was dead, Although the Kite far with unbloodied Beak ? But what might go a good Way towards fupporcing a Conjeture that this was our Author's Word here, is, that there is a pari- cular Passage in another of his Plays, whlere the Fagle and Put- tock are placed comparatively, and in a Light of Opposition to one another. C1'MBELINE. pag. 128.,Cymb. Thot mights' have had the file Son of my u2.een. Imog. 0 blef, that I might not! - - - I chose an EAGLE,,And did avoid a PUTTOCK. - - - I {hall leave these Conjeaural Readings entirely to the Arbitra- tion of better Judgments: But, I think, I may with Modesty as- frm every one of them to be more just, and better grounded, than that espoused by the Editor; and that therefore the Pea. cock may e'en be content to wait for another Elesion.,LXVII. Ibid. Page 4 5. RV:.;zR.- Oh wonderfil fnr, that can so aftonifi a Mother [. ] But is there no fe. p'S.b. quel at the heels of this Mother-Admiration?,CorreEt, as some of the better Books exhibit it;,O-wonderfil Son, that can so aflonif a Mother ! -- - But is there no,Sequel at the Heels of this Mother's-Admiration ?,LXVII.
LXVIII. Ibid. Page 416. Haml. Methinks it is like an tOuzle, ,.;,. Pol. It is black like an Ouzle. c"i,tAn Ouzle, or Black-Bird, it has been printed by Miltake a Ueefel, which is,not black. I have nothing to objeEt against this Alteration made by Mr. PoPE; or, why an Oudle may not be as proper as a Weefel: But I am afraid his Reasoning, that it has been printed by Mistake a Weefel, because a Weefel is not black, - - will notbe altogetherfo incon- teftible; when we come to fee that the Second Edition in Folio, and several other of the Copies have a various Reading, in which there is not the least Intimation of Blackness. There, you read it,,Haml. Metbhiks, it is like a IVeefil. Polon. It is BACK'D like a JFeefei,LXIX. Ibid. Haml. Then will I comc to ny Mother by and by; they fool me to the ,Pi'"'-,top of my bent. I will come by and by. Leave me, friends, I will fay so. By and by is easily said. We have already, in the Course of these Remarks, convers'd with a Place or two, which have given Reason to presume, that, if corre&ed at all, they could be correced only by the Servants at the Press. Here again is a Passage so confused, and so indiscriminately printed, that it furnishes a strong Suspicion of never having been reviled by the Editor. Could so nice a Judge as Mr. PoPE pass over such absurd Stuff as is jumbled here together, and not ob. serve a Fault that is so plain and palpable? Correc it with all the Editions that.I have ever seen, except the Qlarto's of 163 7, and 1703. in which the Text is likewise shuffled and faulty;,p Haml.
Haml. kThen will I come to my Mother by and by. - - - They fool pe t,the Top of ty Bent. ---I will come by and by. Polon. Iwillfay f. Exit Polon. Haml. By and by is eajily said. Leave me, Friends.,Exeunt Rosen. and Guilden. LXX. Ibid. Page 417. Om!~on I will speak daggers to her, but uwe none. "ftr. .' rMy Tongue and foul in this be hypocrites !,[ 3 Exit. The Editor might have taken Notice that a Couplet follows here; in several of the printed Copies, which he mifirufted not to be SHAKESPEARE'S. I will not warrant the Lines to be his, but they are obsolete enough in the Phrase to be so; neither are they so bad, as to be positively disputed. He has many Coup- lets full as bald and poor in the DiEtion; and These have an Authority as old as the second Folio Edition, and have found' a place in mofi of the more modern Copies too. The Verfei are these.,I will speak 'Daggers to her, but ife'none. My Tongue and Soul in This be H3pocrites! How in my Words soever She be t fient, To give them Seals never my Soul consent. Exit.,put to Confusion, rougtly treated. LXXI. A1c 3. Scene 9. Page 417. :F.!£- 2p- I like him hot, t: or flanids it safe with ts,To let his Madness rage. ----- Restore, with all the Editions.,To klt his Mladnefs range. -----,LXXII.
LXXII. Ibid. Mo/l holy and religious fear it is, Correaioli,,Trom Funr;lur To keep tbofe rmany bodies safe, that live Rating. And feed upon your majefly. The last Line here is lame, and ihorter by a Foot than it {hould be, without any Necessity. The second Folio Edition is like- wife faulty, for there the last Line but One is defeative, and the Verses are plac'd thus.,To keep thaoe matly Bodies safe, That live and feed upon your Majefly. A different Disposition of the Verses, and of so long a Date; gives a Proof of a Fault, and a fort of Inlet to the Cure. The OQtarto Edition of 1637, is the only One that I have obferv'd, which makes the Verses compleat; and adds a fine and forcible Emphasis to the Sentence, by the Repetition of one Word; a Figure (as I have before obferv'd in the Remark, N?. XI.) very familiar with SHAKESPEARE. Restore them thus:,Mofl holy and religious Fear it is, To keep those many, many, Bodies fife, That live and feed Tpon your Majesty.,LXXIII. Ibid. Page 418. Oh my offence is rank, it smell to heav'n, Cnjedre. It hath the primal eldest carse upon it, I ] A Bother's murther. Pray, I cannot, &c, Here again the last Verse halts in the Meafiore, and, if I don't mistake, the Sense is a little lame too. Was a Brother's Murther the eldest Curse? Surely, it was rather the Crime, that was the Caltfe of this eldest Curse. We have no Assistance, however,,P 2 . either
either to the Sense or Numbers, from any of the Copies. All the Editions concur in the Deficiency of a Foot; but if we can both cure the Measure, and help the Meaning, without a Dif- grace or Prejudice to the Author, I think, the Authority of the printed Copies is not sufficient to forbid a Conjeture. Perhaps, the Poet wrote;,It has the prinial eldest Curse iupon't, T H A T OF a Brother's Murther. Pray, I cannot, &c. LXXTV. A& 3. Scene o. Page 420. Enta~n:;Gsa. C)p, frord, and know thou a more horrid T I ME;,Whben he is drunk, ajleep, or in his Rage, &c. This, as I take it, is a sophisticated Reading, espoused by Mr. Po PE from the more modern Editions. The second Folio Edi- tion and the t!,ato of 1637, both read;,'Vp, Sword, and know Thou a more horrid HENT; The Editor has taken Notice, at the Bottom of his Page, of this Word, as a various Reading; but, as I humbly presume, without guessing at the Reason of it. 'Tis true, there is no such Sub- itantire, I believe, as Hent; and yet the true Word of the Poet, I am satisfied, lies hid under it, by a flight literal Corruption. Restore it therefore;,'p, Sword, and know Thou a more horrid BENT; i. e. Drift, Scope, Inclination, Purpose, &c. and there is scarce any Word more frequent than This with our Poet, where he has Occasion to express himself in those Senses. (I.) MUCH ADO ABOUT 1NOTHING. pag. 5 I.,They have the Truth of This from Hero, they seem to pity the Lady: it seems, her AffeEions have the fill BE NT.,(z.)
(2.) VINTER's TA L E. pag. S 9.,To your own B EN T S difpoe you you'll b found, Be you beneath the Sky. (3.) JULIus CESAR, pag. 243;,--------. Leave me to work; For I can give his Humour the true B E N T: And I will bring him to the Capitol. (4.) TROILUS andCRESSIDA, pag. 28.,1 bring a Trumpet to awake his Ear, To set his Sense on that attentive BENT, And then to speak. (5.) CrtfBELINE. peg. 123.,--------- But ot a Courtier, (Altho' they wear their Faces to the BENT Of the King's Looks; ) but hath a Heart that is not Glad at the Thing they fcoul at. (6.) R o m E o and yu L I ET, pag. 274;,If that thy B E N T of Love be honoturable Thy Purpose, Marriage; (7.) So twice before in HAM L E T as, pa. 3 8;,- ----- But we Both obey, And here give up our/elves in the full B E N T, To lay our Service freely at your Feet. (8.) And again, pag. 416.,They fool me to the Top of my B E N T.,Iamn
I am futrpriz'd the Editor could remember this Word from None of these Infances, and a Number more that lie interfpers'd in our Poet; especially as it is a Word of his own too in his Pre- face to the Edition, pag. 4. He hits upon that particular Point, on nrhich the BE N T of each Argument turns, or the Force of each Aotive depends. I did not think, when I began this Work, to collate the more recent Folio Editions, especially the fourth, pub- lifh'd in 168 5, for I had it not then by Me; but upon throw. ing my Eye over it lately, I find it is there printed, as I have here correced it - a more horrid B E N T. I thought my self obliged to make this Confeffon, that I might not be accus'd of Plagiarifn, for an Emendation which I had made, before ever I saw a fngle Page of That Book.,LXXV. Ibid. Page 42I. ca Queen. Have yoru forgot me ? Haml. - - - - - To, by the Rood, not so;,3To are the ieeenl, your husband's brother's wife, A N D (Swold it were not so) you are my mother. If I understand at all what Hamlet ihould be prefum'd to fay here, I think, the Editor has adopted a Reading direfly op- pofite to the Sentiment the Poet would express. Surely, Ham. iet does not so much wish that the Queen was not his Mother, as that She was not his Uncle's Wife. He loves and honours her as his Mother; and therefore, out of those Regards, wishes She had not that Disgrace upon her Chara&er, of having married his Uncle, whom he knew to be his Father's Murtherer. The Pafage, certainly, ought to be distinguished as the second Folio Edition, and several other of the better Copies, lead the way.,Queen. Hav-eou forget me ? H . -- - - -- NAo, by the Rood, not jo;,T'o= are thb O'eera, yo.r Husband's Brother's Wife, BUT, 'wouldyov. were not jfo .... ou are my Mother.,LXXVI.
LXXVI. Ibid. Page 422.,Olniflion .--..--.- Ha! haveyou eyes? I,;jt'V. Toa cannot call it love; for at your age, The hey-day of the blood is tame, it's humble, And waits upon the judgment ; and whatjudgment lyould fep from this to this? [,] what devil was't That thus bath cozeM'dyou at hoodman blind? There is an Addition, in several of the Copies, which, tho' it has not the Sancion of any older Edition, that I know of, than the Quarto of 1637. yet has so much of the Style, Dic- tion, and Cast of Thought peculiar to our Poet, that, I think, we may warrant it to be his, and not an Interpolation of the Players without that Authority. Perhaps, it was not written when he first finiih'd the Play; or it was left out in the short- ning the Play for the Representation, and so loft its Place in the first Editions, which were printed from the Players Copies. The Verses are these;,..-..----.- Ha ! have you Eyes ? Toou caniot call it Love; for at your Age The Hey-day of the Blood is tame, it's humble, And waits upon the Judgment; and what Judgment Jfould effroe m This- -- to This --- ? Sense sure you have, Else could you not have Motion; but That Sense Is apoplex'd: for Madness would not err; Nor Sense to Ecftafie was ne'er so thrall'd, But it referv'd some Quantity of Choice To serve in such a Difference. What Vevil was't, &c. The fame Book exhibits another small Addition, which is so much inferior to the former, that I dare not so boldly vouch for it's being genuine.,-~ ~ ---. JtYJhra
--------.- lWhat D2evil was't, That thus hath cozen'd yot at hoodman blind? Eyes without Feeling, Feelingwithout Sight, Ears without Hands or Eyes, Smelling fans all. Or but a sickly Part of one true Sense, Could not so mope.,LXXVII. Ibid. Page 423. fox y.----- ---- . Nay, but to live reatored,nd,in;e 1d In the rank JfSeat of an INCESTUOUS bed,,Stew'd in corruption, hon yiig and making love Over the niafly.y: Here again, as I conceive, we have afophificated Reading pal- med upon us, probably, from the Players first, who did not underfiand the Poet's Epithet, and therefore confdientiouily sub- fticuted a new one. If we go back, however, to the second folio Edition (which is one of those collated by the Editor) we have there a various Reading, of which he is not pleased to take the least Notice, tho', as I verily believe, it restores us the Poet's own Word.,--------- Nay, but to live In the rank Sweat of an ENSEAMED Bed, Stew'd in Corruption, honying and making Love Over the naJly Sty. i. e. gross, ulforne, fwiniJ/' Bed. For, not to dwell too long ups on an rnfavoury Image, the Sweatofany other Bed ofPleafure will be as rank as that of an incestuous Bed. But betides, when we come to the Etymology, and abflrdSted Meaning of enfeam'd, we ihall have a Consonancy in the Aletapbors, and a Reason for the Poet's calling the Bed a nasty Sty. In lhort, the Glossaries tell,us,
us, that geam i is properly the Fdt, or Grease, of a Hog: And tho' I do not remember the compound Adjective from it used in any other Place of the Poet than this before uS; yet he has else- where employ'd the Subflantive; and making Ulyfes speak con- temptuoufly of Achilles, who had fequePter'd himself from the Grecian Captains and the War, he compares him tacitly to a Hog in his Sty, feeding on his own Pride, and Self-fufficiency. TROILUS and CR.ESSIDA pag. 49.,---.----- - Shall the proud Lord, That basts his Arrogance with his own SEAM, And never fsifers Matters of the World Enter his Thoughts, five fitch as do revolve And ruminate himself; Shall He be wotjbipp'd Of That we hold an Idol more than Him ? That were t' enlard his Pride, already fat, ic, .,LXXVIII. Ibid. Page 426. No, in defight of sense and Jecrecy, ·Fae Poist. s'upeg the basket on the houtfe's top, Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape [ To try concluJions [; 3 in the basket creep, And breakyour own neck downe . - The Ape crept into the Basket, to try Concluiions; that is the Meaning of the Poet: But by the Semicolon, wrong-placed, the Sense is interrupted, and the Subflantive divided from its Verb. It ought to be pointed, as some of the Editions rightly have it;,Q. --- and t Seam is derivedfrom a Contradion of Sebum, or Sevum, among the Latins; whicirb 'rds ISIDORE brings a Sue, quafiSuebum, vel Suevum; quia Animal hoc pingue. So Arvina is a ganm'sFat, from the old IWrd Arvix (i. e. Aries) a Ram. Vid. VOSSII Etymolog. Latinum.
----.-- - and like the famous Ape, To try Concltritns, in the Basket creep, And beak your own Neck down. --- I have at last, I think, got thro' all the Errors of this long As, save a flight one, in which SHAKESPEARE is no ways concern'd, committed by Mr. POPE, in a Note of his own, upon the last Speech of it. The ten following Ve fes, fays he, are addedout of the old Edition. It mull for the future be printed, The Nine following Perses, &c. for no more than that Number are reftor- ed either from the old Edition, or those modern ones which have inserted them.,LXXIX. Ad 4. Scene i. Page 428. Ic=.- WIe wouldnot under/land what was moJfft,,Rrc¢a- BBut like the owner ofafoiuldifeafe,,2o keep it from divulging, LETS itfeed Ev'n on the pith of life. The Syntax of this Passage is evidently bad, for WE is the No- minative to both Verbs, and therefore they both muit be Plural. Threeofmy Impreflions, vi. the Quarto'sof 1637, and i703, and that by AMr. Hlugbs, have it as it ought to be.,tfe wouild not underhand what was mojf fit; But like the Owier of a foul 'Disease, To keep it from divulging, LET itfeed EA'onon the Pith of Lift.,LXXX.
LXXX. Ibid. Page 42:,Omiflion Come, Gertrude, we'll ll l p our wififl Friends, Text caje- And let them knoow both what we mean to do, reo- And what's untinely done: [,] 0 come away, My oulisfitll of difJordand diflay. The Quarto Edition of 1637 has an Addi.tion in this Place, which has beenadmitted into most of the modern Editions; tho' it has not the Authority of any earlier Date in Print, as I know of, than that utarto; and yet seems to bear the very Stamp of SHAKESPEARE upon it. The Coin, indeed, haseen clipt from our first receiving it; but it is not so diminified, bit that, with a small Allifiance, we may hop.e to make it pass current. The Reading, as it has hitherto come to us, is thus;,Com.e, Gertrude, we'l call up our wisei Friends, And let them know both what -we mea to do,,And IZbat' 7 timtne done. Whose Whisper p'er the Wprld's .JPameter, As level ,as the Cannon.to his Blak, Transports his poyfon'd Shot, may miss our Name, And hit the woundless Air: 0, comeaway; My Soul is fidl of Vifiord ond fmgin y. 'Tis plain here the Sense is defedive, as xvell as the erse imper- set, which introduces it: and from the Additional'Lines be- ginning with the Relative WHOSE, without any preceding No- minative of which it is govern'd, it is as plain -that -the latter Part of the foregoing Hemiflich fell out in the printing, or was so blind in the Copy as not to be guefs'd at, and therefore necef- farily came to be omitted. I wonder, Mr. HUGHS, who in- ferted this Paffge in his Imprefflon, and could not but fee that,Q z something
something was wanting, did not at the fame time endeavour to supply it. We have not, indeed, so much as the Footfreps, or Traces, of a corrupted Reading here to lead us to an Emen- dation ; nor any Means left of restoring what is loft but Con- jeAure. I ihall therefore offer only what the Sense of the Con- text naturally seems to require. I am far from affirming that I shall give the Poet's very Words, but 'tis probable that they were, at least, very near what follows in Subitance.,Come, Gertrude, we'll call iuf our wise/f Friends, Aid let them know both.what we mean to do, And what's untimely done. Happily, * Slander, WIbofe 1thisfer o'er the World's .Diameter, As level as the Calogn to his Blank, Transports hispoyfin'd Shot, may miJf our Names. And bit the woundless Air. 0, come away;. My Soul is fill of Ditcord and TDifmay.,* Or Rumour. 'Tis evident, This reflores us the Sentimentfeemingly requisite,. and there is the more Room to suppose it the very Sentiment of our SHAKESPEARE. The Poet, I remember, has the fame Thought about the diffusive Powers of Slander in another of his Plays; tho' he has exprefs'd it with for e Difference, as well as with greater Diversity of Metaphor and Allujfton CTr=ELIzNE, ag. I76. -,--- -...--.- Ao 'tis SLANDER,,hbofe Edge is barper than the Sword, whose Tongtxe Out-venoms all the Forms of Nile, whose Breath Rides on the posting Winds, and doth belye All Corners of the World.,LXXXI.
LXXXI. Ad 4. Scene 3. Page 432. -------- Thou may'fl not coldly set Outr ofvereign Procefi, which imports at fJll [ J ing; andlRa-,rioua Read- By letters C 0 N G R U I N G to that efeit, ing reltored The present death of Hamlet. Methinks, there is an-unneceffary Tautology-in this Term Con- gruiing, which is avoided by the Various Reading that possesses many of the: Editions, and is taken Notice of by the Editor at the Bottom of his Page. If' the Letters, importing the Tenour of the Process, were to: that Effet, they were certain- ly congruing; but of no* great Use, when the sovereign Pro- *cess imported the fame Thing. Now a Piocefs might import a Command, and Letters conjuring a Compliance with it be sent, and be of great Efficacy, where the Execution of the Com- mand was to be doubted of, or might admit of a Demur. I cannot therefore but think the other Reading the truest; ancd the Passage ought to be pointed thus;,- - - - - - - hou may'f'ot coldly set Our Sovereign Proceis, which imports at full; By Letters C O N J UR I N G to that Effect The present SDeath of Hamlet; - -- Hamlet, who put a Change upon his Uncle's Commiflfon; and reversed the Subfiance of it, 'tis likely, kept to the Model of it in That which He drew up : And, where he recounts the Contents of it to Horatio, we find him beginning his Com- mand by forcible Conjurations implying the Necessity of it. See pag. 460.,Haml.
Haml. - ----- - Iilt Thou know,Th' Effec of What I wrote ? Hor. - - ---- --- Ay, my good Lord. Haml. At eartieft Co NJ3RAT1ON from the King,,As England was hir faithfiu Tributary, As Teace fborldfiill &c. Perhaps, the Editor might dislike the word conjuring here, be- cause the Cadence of the Verse requires that the Accent ihould lie upon the tepenultima; and the Sense, that it lhould lie upon the-Pernultima. To explain this Difference; when we in- tend by *o~jae, to signify a folerim Adjuration only, we lay the Accet upon the aft Sylable; where-e meam by it a magical tnocatiwo or Esef, the Accent falls upon the sirs. But our Poet uSes the Word in both these Senses promincuoufly, witl- out regard to this Difference in the Pronnciation; and, I be- lieve, generally, if not always, will be found to lay the Stress upon the irfl Syllable. So, again, in HAML pag. 457.,- ----- What is He, whose Griefs Bear fich an Emphasis ? ;whosje bhrafe of Sorrow Conjures the -wandi'r.tg Stars, and makes tbemujiand Like wonaer-wsouded Heaers So, in MA CBE Tz, pag. 568.,I conjure Tou by That whichyou rofefi, Htowe'er 'ou come to to-w it, aJwve' Me. So, in BROMEO and JULIET, pag. az6.,I conjure Thee by Rofalines bright Eyes, By her high Forehead, &c.,;And,
And, again, in the next Page;,...-----. my Invocation is Honeji and fair, and in his MJijrefs' Name I conjure only but to raise up Him. Indeed, but three Lines before the last quoted Infiance, he seems to lay the Accent upon the lafl Syllable of thisWord by the Necessity of the Numbers; tho' the Sense and Accepta- tion, which it carries, require it to be pronounced with the Accent on the firfl.,......... etting it there- Janid, Till She had laid it, and conjur'd it down. But, perhaps, either the CopyiJts, or the Press, by Mistake, made Orrafoat a small Variation from the Author here; and this wrong Ca- Colnjca&e. dence is easily cur'd by only taking out the first it, which is of no Use there; and extending the Second Verb to three Sylla- bles, by pronouncing it, without the Apoflrophe, at length; than which Nothing is more frequent throughout our Author's Works: As,,Till She had laid, and conjured it.doawn. LXXXII. AQ 4. Scene 7. Page 44o.,Itjball as level to your judgment pierce, FIJe *,t. AS day does to your eye.Noie withi,Enter Ophelia fatafjically dress, &c. fro Variso Laert. Let her come in. How now ? whiat noise is that ?,0 heat [ ] dry up my brais [, ] tears [ ] seven timesfalt [ Burn 0 N the Jefete .and vertue es miue eye. Had I never seen any other Edition of SHAKESPEARE than Mr. P!o PE'S, I could not but have fuftpe&ed Something wrong here, tho' I Ihould not, perhaps, have known so easily how,to
to retify it. Just before the Entrance of Opbelia, a Noise is heard behind the Scenes, vi<. of Some, that would ,have 'the Young Lady admitted; and of Others, that would keep her out. Laertes's Friends, as we may obferve.at the. Beginning,of the preceding Scene, where he rushes in by force .upon.,the King, are set to guard the Door; and they might be follici- tous that Laertes -hould fee his Sifter in her.Madnefs, to heighten his Refnenmets .for the Death of his Father.. .tBut it is certainly very absurd that Laertes should- kriow- vh6. it is withobt, upon the Noise made; that Ophelia ihould come.'in; and then that he {hould desire; -that She may come, in; and then after all, that he Ihould enquire into the Mean- ing of the Noise. I think, the second Folio Edition sets the whole Paflage right; and it seems to Me that it ought. to be correced as that Copy, and several Others, which come after, exhibit it with more Propriety thus;,It faill as level toyour Judgment-pierce, . As 'Day does to your Eye.,[A Noise within, Let her come in. Laert. How now ? What Noise is that ?--- -,Enter Ophelia fantastically dreft, &c. 0 Heat, dry ui my Brains;' Tears, fev'i times alt, Burn O U T the Sense rand Virtue of mine Eye. 'Tis natural for Laertes, who was in a riotous Proceeding against the King, to be alarm'd at the Tumult wit0lout, leait his Party could not maintain the Door: And as soon as he fees the Occasion of the. Noise, in the Adriniffion of his dif- traded Sifter, his deep Concern makes him wvifl at once that he were depriv'd both of Sense and Sight. But why, blurn ON the Sense? This Reading, in Mr. Po P Es Impreflion, is, as I apprehend, a literal Mistake of the Press instead of burn O U T; and it is a Mistake so easy to happen, that I think in another Place the fame Error has passed thro' all the Editions of SHAKESPEARE ; and, as I suppose, was not so much as,fufpeded
fufpeted by our Editor, because he has given us the Passage as he found it.,In the WI NTER'S TALE , Floriel, Prince of Bohemia, in Oc(,,rji. a-paftoral Habit, addresses Perdita, an Outcast Princess of Sicily, Emc!dation. but supposed of mean Extraction; who was taken up an Infant, in a Defart of Bohemia, by a Shepherd, and educated as his Daughter. As the Prince is courting, carefling, and whispering her at a Sheep-fl1eering Feast, Polixenes his Father, and an old Courtier attending him, come to the rural En- tertainment. They fix their Eyes on the young amorous Cou- ple, and observing Something in the Virgin above her out- ward Seeming and Rank, fall to making these Observations on them. Polix. This is the pettiest low-born Lass that ever Wintcr'r,Ran on the Green-fird; ANothing She does, or seems, ac T .ó. But filacks of Something greater than herself, Too noble for this sPacc. Camil. ---------- He tells her Something,,That makes her Blood look 0 N 'T. In the first Verse a literal Error is committed at Press, for the other Editions all read, as it ought to be;,This is the pretties low-born Lass ------ Bat what Sense is there in Camillo's Speech, that the Prince tells her Something which makes her Blood look on't ? This to me seems obscure even to the Degree of being unintelligible. The SPEC- TATOR, if I remember right, tells us somewhere a Story of a Climate so cold at one Season, that it congealed Words even in the Pronunciation; and so soon as a Thaw came, they were diftinaly repeated and heard: But, I must own, I never heard of any Words so condens'd as to be visible to the Eye, much less to the Blood. If I underhand any thing of the Poet's Mean- ing'here, he certainly wrote;,R ---- He
.------- He tells her Something, -hat makes her Blood look O U T. i. e. that calls the Blood up into her Cheeks, and makes her blhtb. PERDITA, but a little before, in the self-same Page, :uses a like Expreflion to describe the Prince's Sincerity, which appear'd in the honest Blood rising on his Face.,To;r 'Praises are too large ; but that yourr Youth And the true Blood, which peeps forth fairly through ity to plainly give 'you out an unJlain'd Shepherd, &c. LXXXIII. Ac 4. Scene 9. Page 444. ..::.- .-- 1 lo-vdjour father, and we love Y 0 UR self; f. .rftu And that I hope will teach you to imagine, ---,My Quarto Editions of 1637 and I703, have a different Read- ing of this Passage, which is espoused too by Mr. HUGHS, a;d which I take to comprehend the genuine Meaning of our,Il -vYour Father, and We love OURself; And That, I hope, will &c. I'll now give the Reasons for my being on this Side of the Question. Laertes is complaining, that (because the Kirig durst not prfue -Hamlet to Death for killing Polonius, but had only sent him out of the way;) he has loft a Father, and the Op- portunity of being reveng'd on his Murtherer. The King bids Laertes not break his Sleep about the Want of his Revenge; for, fays He, I v'id your Father, and I love my self; and both Thefe'are fy Motives to That End. But how did the King's'-ove of himself contribute to his Defre of Reienge on Hamlet'? sori theireii lies the Stress of the Alteration. Now there 'are twvo Speeches of the King in this very Scene, that perfwade -me to espouse,this
this Reading, and believe it preferable to That of the Editor: For the King fays expressly, that Hamlet had fought his Life too; and that He was not so unapprehenfive of Danger, as to be negligent in defending himself from it. Page 443', ',Sith you have heard, and with a knowing Ear,;'" That He, which hath your noble Father fJaini, Pursued my Life. And pag. 444. ..,......--- Tou mitfl not think That WIe are made of Stuffo f fat and dull, That We can let our Beard be shook with Danger, And think it Pastime.,LXXXIV. Ibid. Page 444. And that I hope will teach you to imagine - - - -Omiio,Enter Messenger. ' irppy'd. [ ' Mess. These to your MajeJfy , this to the uteen. King. From Hamlet ? who brought them ? The King,.as the Text here stands, had ib other way of know- ing that his Letter was froirnHamlet, than by: knowinghis.Cha- rader upoón the Superscription. And he had'very little Reason ,to credit the Similitude of the Hand; or to expet a Salutation from Hamlet; whom, he knew well, hli had difpatti ' acway for, Englan4,. with an absolute Order for his Executiho asifoon asever, Hefhould 'fetooting there. 'The second Folio Edition, I think,; ifets iight,1tis Passage, bya finall Addition, which, tho' it thould.hare no earlier Authority, fro'm the' Press, we' have ;no Reason but .to tlink came from the Poet's own Harnd: "-;,'R - And
/;d ,hat, I hspe, will teach you to imagine -------,Enter Messenger. How now ? what News ? Les. Letters, my Lord, from Hamlet.,These to jour Majefi y : This to the Queen. King. From Hamlet? Who broutght them ? Now here the King asks the Question, as he naturally might, with a Surprize, and a reasonable Diltruft, Circunmfances con- fidered, that he could have anyLetter from Hamlet: And, per- haps, the Pointing would be jufler, if the firfl Interrogation was turn'd into a Note of Admiration.,King. From Hamlet!---- Who brought them ?,LXXXV. Ibid. Page 44. Si2-. PrF- -------- ---- I will work him,^'5~' 5To an Exploit now ripe in any devise,,'0'nder the which hebiall not chb:fe but fall: It mufl be reftor'd, as all the Editions have it;,------------- I will work him To an Exploit now ripe in ny.Device, 'Vitde &c. To dev-ise, the Verb, is written with anf; but the &bflantive from it always with a c.,LXXXVI.
LXXXVI. .----------- He made Confreionl of Toun ,,, And gave you filch a majierly report For art and exercise in yonr defence; Andfor your rapier most especial, That he cry'd out 'twould be a FIGHT indeed, If one could match yo. . All the Editions, that I have seen, except the Duodetimo pub. lifhed by Mr. T7nfon in 1714, with a small Variation in the Pointing, read this Passage thus;,.----------- He made Confefion of Tou, And gave Tou fitch a maflerly Report For Art and Exercise inyour 5Defence, And foryour Rapier most especially, That he cry'd out, 'Twould be a S I G H T indeed, If One could match Ton.,LXXXVII. Ibid. The Quarto Edition of 1637, has an Addition immediately Onif? following the lat quoted Passage, which has been inserted in the Qtarto of 173 o, arid Mr. HUGHS's Iinpreflibn; and which, if an Interpolation by the Players, has such a Resemblance of SHAKESPEARE, and exaggerates the Description of Laertes's Excellence at the Swxord so aptly, that I think it may be given to our Author without any Injury.,That
That he cryd out, 'T'ould be a Sightiindeed, If One could match Tro. The * S CRIMERS of their Nation, He fvore, had neither Motion, Guard,' nor Eye, If You oppos'd them. Sir, this Report of his,: 8;.- The two latter Editions, which,as I said, have inserted -thisAddi- tion, instead of Scrimers substitute Fencers. Perhaps, they might underfiand the firfJ Term, (but thought it too obsolete to be retained;) for the Alteration is just and pertinent' 't6othe Sense. SEAKESPEAxE, I am well satisfied, knew the Propriety of the old Word, and its Derivation. I think, his Acquaintance with the Italian Tongue neither has been, nor can be, disputed; as he has founded so many of his Plots on Italian Novels, and so often scatters Remnants of that Tongue thro' his Plays.,LXXXVIII. Ibid. Page 447 Fire ~r' . .- ' _duAd then this fiould is like a Spend-thrift's fgh .,=t. 5~r~That hurts by eaJing,I look upon this to be a flight Error of the Pref sandRevifal: For how does a Spendthrift's Sigh hurt more than any otherBody's? All the Editions that I have seen, which insert this -Paflage, concur in reading it, as undoubtedly it ought to be; -',- And then this should is like a fpend-thriftSig, , , That harts by eajing. ctrimrr ispr.'rrv a Gladiator, Fencer, or Oac thatflands ou bis Guard. S K INNER's E-Tmolog. (i: :the l'od, &iirmi);) givesr as a Number of Dcrivatiios of it, but All cent'ring . rt: f.rim P:re. . ,qm :r th: ref, he tells Us, that the Ars Gladiatoria, orScience of )e- f-r.e, r=j cafd bj t:be DUTCH, clbcrm; by the ITALIANS, Scherma and Scrima; and by the FREaxH, Efcrime: A the ANGLO-S.AXONS f fOlduftid to call a Fercer i Swardfmaim, Scrim- -re; -.b (t e b beirg left o::, ar.d afital Mctathefis made in the Letters of the laftSllable ;) i. y :he vry.r' rd fed ly our A;Htcr. . .,~' -'~ -LXXXIX.
LXXXIX. Ibid. .- -.-- He being remifJi Co.rural Mofl. genros d free from all contriving Emendatio. lWill not peruse the foils oO that with ease, '' ' Oj'v';ita little bfhffliing, , ou may chufe . , ,,'t sword U B A' E D, ad ia pas of pr'Eice - . !_. . ;Requite him for r father.' . . We meet this Woird again, afterwards, in pag. 468. .. .,The treach'rous Inirument is in thy hand, U N B AT E D aId envenom'd. The Generality of the Editions consent in reading, as the De- rivation of the Word seems to require, UNBAITED. But flill, I must confess, I want to be taught how unbaited comes to signify baited-? t is a negative Particle (equivalent to the caw of the Greeks;) which is prefixed to Thousands of EngliJl Words, and always deprives them of their native Sense, making them signify the direl contrary. And whenever it is so pre- fixed, I don't know an Infiance either in our Poet, in SPENCER, or -in CHAUcER, that the compound Word signifies what the fim- ple.Word did before it was annexed. If I am not miitaken in this Observation, or it has not its particular Exceptions to which I am a Stranger, perhaps, we may with a very flight Change set our two Passages right. Why might not the Poet write, - . .,A 'Sword. IM BAIrTE D, - - - And so in the other Passage, -',IMBAITED and envenom'd, -- . .. To -inl'ait, is exa&tly what the Latines express by their inefcare, or escd illinere; and we have a Multitude of Words, in our own,Idiom,
Idiom, compounded in the self fame Manner; as, imbargo, irm. bark, irmbjc, imbattle, imbelliiJh, imbectle, imbibe, imbody, imbolden iribofs, ir el, imbroil, ibe, i e, imbree, ie, ib e, immerge, imr,it ij:imiolate, immurre, inpaI:, i/mpair, impale: Cum multis aliis, &c. 0.:..r._, I can remember but a single Passage, in all the Works of C.P:n!:-. SHAKESPEARE, where a Word, with the Particle un prefixed,to it, should seem to signify the fame Thing as the simple Word would do; and even there I. violently fufpe& the present Reading. It is in his King o Hrs, pag. 151. W here Lady CONSTANCE drvifes the Dau!plin of Firace not to sacrifice his Oath and Conscience to the Temptations of a'young fair Bride. Her Words are these;,Lewis, sia;:d faju ; the 'Devil tenpts tbee here Is Likerefs cf a ucw U N T R I M M E D Bride. I cannot conceive what the Poet is supposed to mean here by untrinm'd, unless its opposite, as I take it, in Sense, trim; i. e. neat, spruce, fine. But I cannot admit it, without fomeProof for Convicion, to carry that Signification. Again, there is no Room surely to imagine that the Poet intends to compare the Lady BLANCH, as unmarried, to a Vessel wanting either the Proportion ofher Ballast or Rigging, or not being comspleat in her Trim, as the Sea-phrafe is; and rherefore calls her untrimmed. This would be a remote Allitfon with a Vengeance; and, efpe. cially, when it is put in the Mouth of a Woman too.,As I profess my self to have fufpeaed thePaffage, so I en- deavour'd as far as an unsupported ConjeCure, or two, would go, to reconcile it to an intelligible Meaning. I fay, a Con- ieCure or two, for which I have no Warrant or Assistance from t rhe Copies ; and therefore I shall urge them barely as fich, c:::-a. and leave them to be embraced, or renounced, at Pleasure. If,it did not depart too widely from the present Text, to make such a Correction reasonable, it is not impoflble but the Poet might have wrote;,-------- tb: Te-vil tei;pts thee here In Lik;;cf;-cf a ccw UNTAMED Bride.,1. e.
i. e. a Virgin-Bride; a Bride yet unbedded. I cannot, indeed, re- collea any Instance, in which the Poet has ever taken the Li- berty of using this Epithet in that metaphorical Sense: But it is a Sense, in which I am sure he may be born out, andjutified, by the Usage of other Languages. An untamed Bride exadly a- mounts to what the Latines call'd Virgo indomita ; which I be. lieve they borrow'd from the 7ai, ros sgaw. of the Greeks; that is, a Bride untafled, nenjoy'd. And it will be no new Dodrine, to fay, that Temptation and Desire are generally heighten'd in Men by that Circumstance.,But I observe that trin is used as an Epithet by our Author, to signify not only neat, spruce, &c. but fuibfJantively too, for a peculiar Quaintness and Elegance of Habit. So in the Firfi Part of HENRr IV. pag. zoo.,IJVhen I was dry with Rage, and extrea0i Toil, Breathless and fain, leraiing upon my Sword, Came there a certain Lord, neat, T R I M L Y dres'd; Fresi as a Bridegroom, &c. So in CrMIBELINE. pag. 181.,-...-------- and forget rour labourfome and dainty T R IM S, with which Toil made great Juno angry. And he employs it besides to signify personal Beauty, and the Hue and Brightness of Colours. So in his Poem of VE N U s and ADo NIS, pag. 41.,jThe Flo:v'rs are fJ'eet, their Colours frejfq and TRIM, Biut true fJaeet Beauty liv', and dy'd ii Him. It is not improbable therefore, that the Passage before us ought s.&im(:o, - to be reftor'd thus; Jctlrc.,Lewis, fland fifi; the 7Devil tempts thee here In Likeness of a new B E T R I M M E D Bride.,S i.e.
i. e. adorn'd, and deck'd writh Charms. It is familiar with our Poet to use the word betrim in these Senses; and it is certain- ly of Saxon Derivation; among whom gettymmed signified neat, fine, finifJed, &c. The Transmutation of g into b was cuflo- mary in Words of Saxon Original; as gewarian, to beware; ge. lafain, to believe, &c. Of which Changes, thro' all the Letters of the Alphabet, SKINNIER has difcours'd at large in his Prole- gomena Etym ologica. i-' BBut if betrimmed may seem to any to depart too far from coj.-;. the Traces of the Test, as it now stands, I'll propose another,Correlion that requires but a very minute Change, and comes up to the Sense of the former; As,,Lewis, fland fait ; the 5Devil tempts thee here Is Likeness of a new A ND TRI M M ED Bride. i. e. of a nero Bride,. and one, as I said before, deck'd with all the Charms of personal Beauty.,I have hinted above, that I remember'd but a single Passage in our Author, where a Word, with the Particle un prefixed to i1, ihould seem to figniry the fame Thing as the simple Word would do: Bur I find lince, there are fame other Instances of this kind; One, at least, in which Sbakefpeare is countenanc'd by the Usage of other Writers: Some, in which his present Reading is certainly to be disputed, and therefore ought to be corrected. See King HzN-r VIII. pag. 487.,------- for where I'm robb'd and bound, There tnji I be unloos'd, src. 'Tis evident here, that unloos'd signifies loos'd; and so we find it used by other Writers. To go no farther for Authorities than theTranflation of our New Testament, there is a Passage where, in three of the Evangelifis, the Word unloos'd is made to mean loosed; -- WlofJeS1oe-laftchs I am not worthy to unloose, &c. This Term therefore, without any more ado, must be admitted,equivocal
equivocal in its Signification. But let us try our Author upon another doubtful Passage, and then I have done with this Re- mark. I observe he uses the Term, to bonnet, in the Sense of --- to pul off the Cap to. COSIOLANUS, pag. 130.,He hath deferv'd worthily of his Country; and his A/cent is not by,fitch eajy 'Degrecs as Those who have been fipple and courteous to the People, bonnetted without any ftrther 'Deed to heave them at all into their Ejimation and Report. i.e. that have won the People's Hearts, only by Submission, and pulling off the Hat to them. Now as bonnetted here ma- nifeilly Iignifies pulling off the Hat; so, on the other hand, if you can believe our Author's Text, unbonnetted is in another place employ'd to mean having the Hat on. OTHELLO, pag. 482.,-- - -..- I fetch Life and Being From Men of royal Siege; and my 'Demerits May speak, unbonnetted, to as proud a fortane, As This that I have reach'd. W\ill any Body pretend that the Idiom of our Tongue can admit unbonnetted here to intend, with the Hat on, as the Sense of the Place necessarily requires ? I cannot help faying with Ho- R AC E,,--------- Credat Yudaeus apella, Non ego. -------- Enimcdatiqn. In short, I dare affirm, the Press, or the Transcribers, have palm'd a Reading upon the Author contrary to his Intention. I am of Opinion, that, to bonnet, is equivocal, and lignifies, as the Context may require, either to pull of, or put on, the Hat; but that, to unbonnet, is always to pull it off. I make no Scruple, therefore, but that the Author wrote thus;,S2 ----I
- ------ I fetch Life and Being From Men of royal Siege; and rmy 'Demerits M9y speak, and bonnetted, to as prond a Fortune, As This that I have reach'd. i. c. may speak with the Hat on, without shewing anyDegrees of Deference, or Inequality to: Which small Alteration restores us the plain Sense of the Poet.,XC. Ac 5. Scene r. Page 45o. tCG-CC;..n, For here lies the point; if I drow;n ivy Jsef wittingly, it argues an,.-_,-:. acl; .:d an act hath three braeches. It is AN ACT TO DO:,and TO PERFORM, a:gal, ic. Very notably made out ! If an A& has Three Branches, as the honeit Clown here defines it to have, it would puzzle a good Arithmetician to find them out from this Reading. 'Tis true, the Folio Editiops exhibit it thus; and so, indeed, does the Duode- cimo Edition publish'd by Mr. Tonfon in 1 714. But, surely, to d, and to peiforimi, can be but two Branches; and if we ad- mit This for the true Reading, then we ought to correct the Paiage: - - - A.i:d;: _Ac hath Two Branches; it is an A.4 to do, and to perform. But the 2'a!ito Edition of 163 7, I believe, will infirucl Us to read the Place exadcly as the Poet intended it.,For here lies the Point; if I drown nmy self wittingly, it argues an,Ai; a;nd an Ac_ hath three Branches; it is, --- to A CT, --- to D O, - - - and to P E R F O RM --- argal, &c.,XCI. Adc 5 Scene 2. Page 456. F;: ?-. ..- --------- ha..t is that they follow,,,And with fricb maimed RI G H T S? The Church-Ceremonies, that are ordered either in Marriages or Funerals, are always written Rites, (from Ritus, in the Latine;) and no: Rigbts. Correc therefore,,--- lWhat
- hat is That they follow, And with filch maimed R I T E S ? The fame literal Mistake, I find, is made in the T EM P E s T, pag. 5 5.,If Thou dost break her Virgin Knot, before O,4Jonl All fantlimonious Ceremonies may Correjion. With full and holy R I G H T be mintfletrd, &c. Where, likewise it must be reflor'd, RI T E. And so Mr. Pope at other times takes care to spell this Word ; as thrice in this very Play of Hamlet. Page 442.,No noble B I T E, nora forral Ofentation, And, pag. 4 57.,Tet here She is allowed her Virgin R I T E S, And again, pag. 471.,---------- A-ndfor his Pailage, The Soldier's Mujick, and the RITE S of WYar Speak loudly for him. ---. And so in R oM EO and JUL IET, pag. z74.,If that tly Bent of Love be honourable, Thy iurpofe Marriage, fend me 1Word to morrow. By One that I'llprocure to come to Thee, Where, and what time, thotu ilt perform the R I T E. And in many other Places.,XCII.
XCII. Acd 5. Scene 3. Page 461. r Horat. --------- Hw was this seal'd? " Haml. Ilvy ev',n in that was Heaven ORDINATE.,So the Folio Editions write this Passage with the Editor; and so I find, Mr. To - s o N's Duodecimo, so often mention'd, likewise exhibits it. But why a Paifve Participle here, when the Sense, I think, plainly requires an AItive ? Ordinate, must signify or- der'd, dirested, agreed to; not ordering, directing, concurring with, as the Poet's Meaning seems to demand. My Q)arto Editions, which are follow'd by Mr. HIUGHS in his Impref- lion, read, as I verily believe the Paflage ought to be re- ilor'd. Horat. --------- How- was This seal'd ? Haml. [hy e-'n in That was Heaven OR DI NANT.,XCIII. Ibid. Omiioa Horat. So Guildenfierne ald Rofencraus go to't. *, J'.- Hanl. [ ],2Tey are not a;ear ny Confcie.ce ; their VDefeat Doth by their cwn infrniation grow. The second Folio Edition begins Hamlet's Speech with a Verse, which we have no Reason to believe is not SHAKESPEARE'S; and which, I think, is very essential to explain the two Verses that follow it. I don't know whether Mr. Po PE fufpe&ed, or overlook'd it; but, I am sure, it may be reftor'd without any Detriment.,Hora.t So Guildenfrern and Rofencraus go to't. Haml. Why, ahn, they did make Love to this Employment:,They are ft -ear my Conircienrce ; their Defeat D)'th by their own Ili'iaetion grow.,XCIV
XCIV. Ad 5. Scene 4. Page 464. Haml. It is but Foolery; .but it is filch a kind of Game-giving as Va,ioiu,would perhaps trouble a Voman. reford, and Hor. If yor mind dislike ary thing, obey it.. I will forefal their re- xaied,pair hither, and fay you are not fit. I do not know whether the Editordefigned this Reading, which, I find, possesses some of the Editions betides; or whether it be a literal Error of the Press only. I mutl own, I am at a Loss to understand the Meaning of Game-giving. The anrto Edi- tion of 1703, and Mr. Hughs agree in reading, But it is such a kind of boding, &c. 'Tis certain, they express the Author's Sense exaaly in this Word; but they have put a Change upon him, for Want of underflanding his Original. The second So- lio Edition reads the Passage, as it ought to be reftor'd;,It is but Foolery; but it is fitch a kind of gain-giving, as,would, perhaps, trouble a WYoman. To Gain-give, is to difrufl, or, as we more vulgarly express it, to miJgive. It is of Saxon Derivation, among whom gean figni- fled againfi; and so we at this day use gain-say, to imply con- tradisE, fay againfl.,XCV. Ad 5. Scene 5. Page 466. And in the Cup an 0 N Y X Plall he throw, , Richer than that which four fiuccejfive kings Read,,g,arcluor'd, and In Denmark's crown have wore. aftered. So again, pag. 468.,Drink of this potion: is the ON Y X here?,I find
I find, this Reading possesses several of the Editions, and even That of the accurate Mr. HrUGRS. I don't know upon what Authority it first obtain'd; but it seems evident to Me, who- ever introduced it, did not mind to expound the Author by himself; which is the surest Means of coming at the Truth of his Text. The second Folio Edition has it in both places.,A;'d in; the Ci;p an U N I ON S Iall he throw, Richer than That, &c. And so in the second Passage;,'Drink off this Potion ; Is thy U N I O N here ? Mr. Pope, indeed, takes Notice of this as a Various Reading, but in Both places fubtfitutes Onyx. I am clearly for the Union being reftor'd; and !hall submit my Reasons for it to Judg- ment. An Onyx, as we may find from PLI NY and the other Zt!traiifls, was a finall Stone-Gemm; and was likewise a coarser Species of h!cid Stone, of which they made both Co- lumns and Pavements for Ornament. An Union is a fine Sort of Pearles, so call'd, either because they are found single, or because they resemble an Onion in Shape, &c. But the Etymo- logy of the Name is of no Consequence here. I'll transcribe thle King's whole Speech, by which it will appear for what, and upon what Terms, he promises to throw a Jewel into the Cup; and after that Another short Speech, from which I believe it will be apparent, that Union ought to be reftor'd instead of O0yx.,Set ~.:e the Stcops of l'ine iopan that Table: If Hamlet gic te e firtf or second Hit, Or quit iin A'fe of the third Exchange, Let all the Battl;emrents their Ord'nance fire: -Te King Jba!. dri, ,e to Hamlet's better Breath; And in the Cp an Onyx ihall he throw,,Richer
Richer than That which folur flcceffive Kings In Denmark's Crown have worn. Well; Hamlet and Laertes immediately fall to play with the Foils; Hamlet gives Laertes the firfi Hit; and the King there- upon, in Performance of his Promise, fays;,Stay, give me D9rink: Hamlet, this PEARL, is thine; Here's to thy Health; give him the Cup. Now if an Union be a Species of Pearl, as it certainly is; and if an Onyx be a transparent Gemm, quite differing in its Na- ture from Pearls; the King faying that Hamlet has earn'd the Pearl, I think, amounts to a Demonitration, that it was an Union-pearl he meant to throw into the Cup; and that there- fore, as I said before, Union ought to be reftor'd into the Poet's Text; and Onyx cafheer'd as a spurious Reading. Besides, if I am not mistaken, neither the Onyx, nor Sardonyx, are Jewels, which ever found Place in an Imperial Crown.,XCVI. Ad 5. Scene 6. Page 470. .-----. Oh proud death ! T'ar;or What feast is tow'rd in thine ET E R N AL Cell, eig That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily ha't jfrook ? I can fee no great Propriety here in this Epithet of eternal; nor does it communicate any Image suitable to the Circumstance of the Havock, that Fortinbras looks on, and would represent in a Light of Horror. He, upon the Sight of so many dead Bodies, exclaims against Death, as an execrable, riotous DePfroyer; and as preparing to make a favage'and hellish Feast. The Quarto Edition of 1637 seems to give us an Epithet more forcible, and peculiar to this Scene of Acion.,T .-..0
....... 0 proud 5Death ! What Feffi is tow'rd in thine I N F E R N A L Cell, That lThoan many Princes at a Shot So bloodily haft firook ?,XCVII. Ibid. Page 47I. Ca -, ';", Fordnb -L -- --- r Let folu captains w'e,5. CBear Hamlet like a soldier O F F the flage;,As Errors made theirAppearance very early in this Play, so they keep their Ground to the very Close of it. Why bear Hamlet OFF the Stage? I meet with this Reading no where but in the fourth Folio Edition ; and in the Duodecimo publiih'd by MIr. To Nso , which does not much out-do the Other in Corretnefs. Surely, Fortiniras cannot be supposed to confider either himself, or Hamlet, here, as AEors before an Audience; and upon the Stage of a Theatre. The Poet must very firangely forget himself, to be guilty of such an Absurdity: But I dare fay, he may be clear'd from a Suspicion of it. In short, the Cafe is This: Hamlet, upon the Point of Death, conjures Ho- ratio, who was desirous to have poifon'd himself, to relinquish those Thoughts, and to live, and by a true Representation of Occurrences, rescue his Charater and Memory from Scandal. Page 460.,Oh, good Horatio, what a wounided Name, Things jfanding thus unknoIwn, fiall live behind MIe ! If nThou did'f ever hold me in thy Heart, Abrent thee firom Felicity awhile, And in this harfbh l'orld draw thy Breath in Pain, To tell my Tale.,Horatio,
Horatio, in Obedience to this Command, desires Fortinbras will order, that the dead Bodies may be placed on a publick Stage, or Scaffold, and he will speak to the Business of their difaitrous Deaths. Page 470.,-------- -- Give Order that these Bodies High O N A STAGE be placed to the View, And let Me speak to th' yet muknowing World How these Things came about. Nay, and he desires that This may be done with al poffil bleDifpatch, left, thro' a Delay, any farther accidental Mif- chief might intervene. Page 471.,But let this fame bep refently perform'd, Ev'n while * Meens Minds are wild, leaf more Mirchatnc On Plots and Errors happen. Fortinbras likes the Proposal, expresses himself in Haste to hear what Horatio has to fay; and is for convening the No- blest Persons of the State to the Audience of it. There is no doubt, therefore, but we ought to restore this Passage, as all the better Editions have it;,It i in Air. Pope's Edition, by a Fault of the TPrefi, men minds.,T Fortinb
Fornb. - - - --Let four Captains,Bear Hamlet like a Soldier T 0 the Stage; that is, to the Stage, or Scaffold, from whence Horatio desired to explain the casual and plotted Calamities, that had befall'n them in the Persons of their Princes.,THE
THE APPEN D IX.,HE Examination of this tingle Play has drove out into such a Length, that I am almofi afraid to think of an Appendix to it. But I have tied my self down by express Engagement, at my setting out; and I am satisfied, unless an Author acquits himsel very badly, the Publick never care to bate him his Promifcs. I undertook, I think, boldly to prove, That, whatever Errors occurr'd in HAMtLET, Er- rors of the fame Sorts Ihould be found in the other Plays, through- out all the Volumes. 'Tis evident, the Fnults of that Play have bran- ched out into many C/asOes: And I have an ample Stock of Matter before Me, to make good my Assertion upon every individual Spece;. As tnis is but a pcimen, I nhall be crcufed from pointing out those innumerable literl, Faults of the Press, which every Reader can correc, that docs but throw his Eye over the Pafrages. As to the Faults of Pointirg too, I Ihall confine my self to remark on Such on- ly, in which the Scnfe is palpably injured; in which the Editor has followed the old printed Copies, and in which he has either not fcem'd to fufpet a Fault, or not underflood how to recify it. The Design of this Work was an honest Eudeavour to restore SHAKESPEARE ftom the Corruptions, that have taken Place in all his Editions: And, to this End, I gave it as my Opinion, that an Editor of Him, ought to be a Critick upon him too. The Want of Ori- ginals reduces us to a Necessity of gueDfing, in order to amend him; but these GuesTes change into Something of a more filbfitatial Nature, when they are tolerably supported by ReafGj or Authorities. There is certainly a Degree of Merit in a good Conjecture; tho' it be not Co thoroughly fatisfa&ory and convincing as the Party, who advances it, flatters him- self it mull be. This calls to my Mind a Sentiment in an oldLatin Verse, though I do not remember at present to what Author we owe it;,BenE qui conjiciet, Vatem hunc perhibcbo oqtiram. I am far from entertaining so vain an Hope, that every Conje&ure, which I have ventur'd to make, Lhall be followed with the Concurrence and Applause .of the Readers: But I may dare to aflcrt, Some of them are so well-grounded and certain, that They renew in Me a With, that Mr. POPE had proposed to himself to enter upon this Province. This would naturally have led him to weigh every Line of his Author with that Care and Judgment, that, I believe, Then he would have retraced some few of those Conjecures which he has made; and in which he seems to have err'd, either from Want of duly confidering the Poet, or of a competent Knowledge of the Stage. The Cause of SHAKESPEARE is here engaged, and the Restitution of Him concern'd; and therefore I mull beg Mr. POPE'S Par- don for contradiaing Some of his Conjeaures, in which he has mistaken the Meaning of,our
Ocr Author. No other Cause, but This, should provoke me to run so bold a Rifque; and if I have the ill Fortune to deceive my seif in the Attempt, I shall willingly submit to own my felt, (as HAMLET fays to L.ERTES, ) his Foil iir my Ignorance.,hne elceprionab!c Conje&ures of the Editor, I think, may be ranged under these Heads; as, where he hasf/,t-;:::sd a frecb Reai'ng, and there was no Occasion to depart from the Poet s Texc; whecre he has raimn'd the Author by an unadvis'd Degradation; where he has made a btd Choice in a Vsrious Reading, and degraded the better Word; and where he, by .ijftairsg the Gloss of any Word, has given a wrong Turn to the Poet's Sense and Meaning. Of the frfr Species of These I Ihall produce but a lingle InRlance because my Defence cf rhe Poer will take pn some Room: But, I am in hopes, the Novelty of the Subjet, and the Varie of the teMatter, will make it not appear too tedious. The PafTage, upon which I ma-e my Observation, is This: xr. p.er I. T.aOILtus a-d CRESSID., P. 42. 5II·- de; a2!. Paris ar.d Troilus, )o, bhare Both said well: Vi i-:-. * And co the Ca:use a:d Q:efJt:on now in hbnd,Haze gofs'd bat fjaperficially; rnt mxch US:lie 2.:rg Mic, w-iom GRAVER SAGES tMhnk LUr.f to hser nmorl Philosophy. -f -P'. :. The EnDIOR, I remember, in his Preface, f speaking of the Method taken in his Edition,,tells us that the Vriorus Readr.gs are fairly py t in the 2Iargin, o tbat every one may compare :hm-; ard th.f: he has rFje rr'd jto the Text are CONSTANTLY ex ide Codicum, :pon Azlr.4 . I heartily beg the Pardon of this Gentleman, if, thro' Ignorance, I fiall afert a Fatihood here, in being bold to Lay, that This may be call'd an Exception to his Rule; tha: Grser Sages is preferr'd into the Text without ary Authority, and that all the printed Copecs read the Pa-Tage thus;,-------------- noct ntrb UIi.k lro:.ig Men, whom ARISTOTLE thought LUfif o hear mora! fPhilofopby. As o-.A.rifm 'Tis certain, indeed, that Ar.rots was at leafl S0o Years subsequent in Time to Heelor; ,C'--'i,.' and therefore the Poet makes a remarkable Innovation upon Chronology. But Mr. POPE,will have this to be One of thofepalable Bluders, wnich the Illiteracy of the firl Publilhers of his Works has fther'd upon the Poet's Memory, and is of Opinion that it could not be of onr Author's penning; i: no: bring at all credible, that there could be the Errors of any llr:a wh, bst.d she ti Tir.n're of a School, or the leaI Conterfation with firch as had.* 'Tis * Frs' ft. ~ for this Reason, and to shelter our Author from such an Absurdity, that the Editor has ex-,pun='d the Name of A.ISTOTLE, and fubifituted in its place graver Sages. But, with Sub- mi£on, even herein he has made at bell but half a Cure. If the Poet mull be fetter'd down fi'eiay to the Chronology of Things, it is every .whir as absurd for Helor, to talk of PHI- *Dio--mLi- LOSOPHY, as for him to talk of Arito:Ie. We have sufficient Proofs, t that Pythagoras was r-.- Ci- the firtr who invented the Word Pbilofopey, and cail'd himself Philosopher: And he was ceo. fr;-Ee- near 6o3 Years after the Date of Helor, even from his beginning to flourish. 'Tis true, r--- Poi- the Thing which we now onderiand by Philosophy, was then known; but it was only ca5; 'as- tiLt rte call'd Knsrwledge and Yfiif m. But to dismiss this Point; I believe this Anachro- c -:-,-t: n;i-frn of our Poet, (and, perhaps, all the Others that he is guilty of,) was the EfTec of Po- r: -"- elick Licence in him, rather than Ignorance. Ar?' ;--oi It has been very familiar with the Poets, of the Stage especially, upon a Supposition that f-r :" -o , their Audience were not so enxatly inform'd in Chronology, to anticipate the Mention of S"fie:'s . Persons and Things, before either the firjf were born, or the latter thought of. SHAKE- T:.',P-;c SPEAE again, in the fanme Play * compares the Nerves of AJAX with those of bull.bearing Si. MILO of Crctora, who was not in Being till 6o0 Years after that Greek; and was a Difcl- S:as, Aa- p:e of PvthsLgora"t . Again, Pardaris, at the Conclusion of the Play, t talks of a Win- r-i .C-' -. cr. ,er-Gos'e: Indeed, it is in an Addrels to the Audience; and then there may be an Al- P ' s11t. lowance, and greater Latitude for going out of Charader. Again, in 5 CORIOLANUS, § Pa 1:.*- M'cri:tS taiks of Gale:, who was not born till the second Century of the Chrilian Era:,And
And the ven Hero of that Play talks of the Grievance that he imu fltoop to, in begging Voiccs of Dick and IHob*: Names which IdarefaytheEditordoes not imagine, that SHaKE- * Page 9. SPEARE believ'd were ever heard of by that Roman. From his many Plays founded on our Engli/h Annals, and the many Points of History accurately tranfnitted down in them, I flppofe it mult be confefs'd that he was intimately versed in that Part of Reading: Yet, in his King LEAR, he has ventur'd to make t Edgar talk of the Curfew, a Thing not known 1t Pge 6, in Britain, tillthe Norman Invasion: In his King JOHN he above fitty times mentions Can- nons, tho' Gunpowder was not invented till above a Century and an half after thL Death of that Monarch; and what is yet more singular, (as he could not be a Stranger to the Date of a remarkable Man, who liv'd so near his own Time;) twice in the Story of Henry VI. he makes Mention of ASachiavel as a subtle Politician: Tho', 'is very well known, He was chief Counsellor to the wicked CJfar Borgia, and a Favourite to the Popes Leo X. and Clement VII. the latter of whom did not come to the Papal Chair till the ifth Year of K. Henry VIII. All these Transgressions in Time therefore, as I said before, are Liberties taken knowing- ly by the Poet; and not Absurdities flowing from his Ignorance. There is one Pafiage, I remember, in our Author, in which, if I am not mistaken, he may be prefum'd to sneer at his own Licentiousness in these Points. It is in'his LEAR: The King's Fool pronounces a fort of Dogrel Prophecy; and as soon as he has finilh'd it, cries, t This Prophecy Merlin Pra , S, jfall male; for I do live before his time. Nor have these Liberties been taken alone by SHAKESPEARE among our own Poets: In the Humoroets Lieutenant of BEAUMSONT and FLETCiHER, all the Characters of which Play are the immediate Successors of Alexander the Great: Dcemetrins, Prince of lacedon, comes out of his Chamber with a Pitol in his Hand, above isoo Years before Fire-drmis were ever thought of. So, in the Oedipris of DR'DEX and LEE, there is a Mention of the Aa- chines in the Theatre at Athens; tho' neither Plays, nor Theatres, were so much as known to the World till above soo Years after that Prince's Days. And yet I dare fay, neither Beaumont and Fletcher ever supposed, or thought to make their Audiences believe, that PiRols were used in Demetrins's Time; nor were DI9ydcn and Lee so ignorant in Dramati- cal Chronology, as to suppose 'ragedy of as early a Date as Oedipus. But that the Poets of our own Nation may be julified in these Liberties by Examples of the Antieuts, I'll throw in a few Instances of the like fort from their Predecellors in the Art at Greece. The Great SOPHOCLES, in his Elellra, supposes that Orefles was thrown from his Chariot, and kill'd, at the Pvythiai Games; which Games, as the Scholiall tells us, were not instituted till 600 Years afterwards by Triptioleiis. And frequent Inliances occur in Atheneus, that Ihew, beyond Exception, how tree the Comick Poets made with Chronology. ALEXIS in his Comedy call'd Hejione, introduces tlercules drinking out of a Tshericlean Cup: Nosw this was a Species of Cups, invented by Tbericles a Corintolian Pot- ter, who was Contemporary with Ariflophantes, above 80o Years after the Period of ller- cules. ANAXANDRIDES, in his PrroteAiltas, a Hero that was kill'd by Hetor, brings in Her- rules again, and talks of Iphicrates the Athenian General, and Cotys the T'hracian King, both living in the Poet's own Days. And DIPHILUS, 111 his Sappbho makes Arcilochus, and Hip- ponax, both address that poetical Lady, tho' the firfi was dead a Century before She was born; and tho' She was dead and rotten before the latter was born. If these Inftanccs of Transgression in Time may go any Way towards acquitting our Poet for the like Inconfiltencies, I'll at any Time engageto ftrengthcn them with ten t' imes the Number, fetch'd from the Writings of the belt Poets, ancient and modern, foreign and domellick. II. I come now to confider a 2Degraded Paffagc, by which I think we may safely affirm Degraded p.i,; the Poet's Sense to be maim'd. It may be very juRlly said of SHAKESPEARE'S Style, as He fge rcltord. himfelt fays of the Web of human Life, it is of a mingled Tarn, good and ill together. And therefore it mult be own'd, Mr. POPE has very often with great Judgment thrown out of the Text such low Tralh, as is unworthy of the Poet's Characer, and minll disgust a Read- er who is desirous to be pleased. But if unhappilyfome of his mean Conceits are so inter- mingled either with the Business, or the Sense of the Context, that they cannot be rejected without leaving an Imperfe"tion, there we must dispense with them; and content ourselves to be sorry for the Levity of the Author's eP;i, or the Iice of the Times that forc'd him to bring in such thaldlfitticifirs. Let us now examine the Editom's Rule in making these De- gradations. Some fnfpeled Paf;~iges, fays He, t vwich are exceJjiiely bad, (and 7which rfecmn . pal Interpolations, by being so inserted tb.at one can intirely omit them without any Chasm r. De- ficience ii the Conrtxt,) arc degraded t the Botoam of t:e Page; wvith an Asterisk referring,to
;. the 1; :es cf teir Irferl.is. I am afraid, all the degraded Passages are not thrown out with that due Care, but that there is left an actual Deficience in the Context for want of their Insertion. As for Example; In TROILUS and CRESSIDA, Page 87. Alteror the T'rojan, a Prisoner to the Greeks, be- ing agreed to be ezchang'd for Crefjida the Daughter of Calchas, Diomede is sent from the Greeks to bring her from Trov; and upon her Arrival at the Grecian Camp with him, file receives a Welcome from the Princes.,Agam. Is this the Lady Cressida? Diom. -------------- Es'n She. Again. 3l.rs dearly wellcorme to the Greeks, sweet Lady. * Diom. Lad', a lford, --- il Iring you to your Father. Netl. AWoman of quick Sense.,[Diomede leads out Cressida, then returns.' If I am not deceiv'd, no les than Three Blunders are committed in this Scene on Account of Creu.t To set them right methodically, we mud go back to the Beginning of the Scene, and examine the Parties enting.,Page 86. Scene VIII. The GRECIAN Camp. Er..er Ajar er'd,: Aganemnon, Achilles, Patroclus, Menelaus, Ulysses, Neflor,,CALCHAS, &c. Now here the E: sr, for want of due Care, runs into an Error with the printed Co- ries. If Dii:ede leads Cre/id off as the Poet certainly means he should, in order to deli- ver her up to her Father, 'tis plain, as the Sun at Noon-day, that Calcbas cannot be fuppo- led upon the Stage: His Name therefore mull be expung'd from among the Names of Those that are laid to enter. In the second Place, is it not very absurd for Siiomede to bring her on where so many Princes are present, and preparing to give her a Welcome, and then to lead her off abrupt- ly, so soon as ever Agarmeroer. has said a ingle Line to her? But it is still more absurd, when Crej is made to be led off without uttering one single Syllable, for NESTOR to observe, that She .: a Wom. of a:-,ck Serfe; as if she had siid several witty Things. The Truth is, in the old Copies, glanrr..sre, NesEor, Achilles, 'Palrocle, and Menelaus, all kifs Crelid; and, alter the Line at which the Aflerisk is plac'd, there follows the Quantity of a Page of Repartee betwixt :ilere.:ls, Patrocers, Ulles and Crefdid; in which Creflid bears her full Share. Indeed, the Matter of the Dialogue is but poor, and confilts of Conundrums and low Conceits; vet it contains so much Raillery on the Part of Cressid, that there is some Colourfor N.ft:r to fay, She is a lIorzan of qu.ick Sense. This Dialogue therefore, mean as i i, must be reftor'd, or Neiflr's Character of her l'it, from her faying Nothing, will be as extraordinary as the two Kings of Bren.ford hearing the Whisper, tho' they are not pre- sent, in the RELEARSAL. And, in the third Place, 'io;srede is said to lead out Cressid, and then return. Now, no Ie-nt,,y of him being mark'd in the Books, this Note, according to the Custom of the Stage, implies, that He only goes with Cressid to the Scene, and comes back immediately; bat it is intended that he should surrender her to her Father's Hand at his Tent; which, letit have been ever so near to that of Agraemron, muff take up some little Space of Time; and therefore, I think, it ought to be said only thus, ---- Exit Diomede, leading Crefdida: --- and that, immediately before this Verse in Page 89.,Again. Here is Sir Diomede: Go, gentle Knight; &c. the Re-entry of Si-med: ought to be mark'd: For thus above Thirty Verses are allowed for the Interval of his Absence; and the Beginning of Agarnemrnons Speech seems to inti- mate that DiPsmie comes back, and joins them, at the very Intant heis uttering his Words.,111. But
III. But if (as in marking the Entrance of Calhas, when he ought not to be brought on ) Mr. POPE has err'd once by following all the printed Copies, I'll produce another Infance from the fame Play, in which, I think, he is as plainly mistaken by departing from the whole Set of Editions.,TROILUS and CRESSIDA, Page 12.,Pand. Good morrov,' colnin Creflid: lz7at do you talk of * How do you, Colrnn?,When werd you at Ilium? * Gd morrow lexander, is added in all the Editions very abfirdy, PAsIS not being,on.the Stage. This is the Note Mr. POPE has fubjoin'd as his Reason for throwing tho/e Words out of the Text. I confers, I want a better Reason, before I can think of following the Editor's private Opinion, in this Cafe, againfl the Authority of all the Impreflions. I am very well persuaded, notwithstanding Parts is not on the Stage, there is no such Absurdity as Mr. Pope has suspeCted, but that the Words, Good tmorrow, Alexander, ---- ought to be honeflly re- flor'd to the Poet's Text. In short, before the Entrance of Pandarns, Crelid and her Man are upon the Stage together, discoursing about Hetor's Resentment againfl Ajax, and for what Cause. And why might not Alexander be the Name of Crefid's Man? Paris had no Patent, I suppose, for engrossing the Name to himself. Besides, Pandarus being of a busy, fiddling, insinuating Charaser, 'tis natural for him, as soon as he has given his Cou- fin the good Morrow, to pay his Civilities too to her Attendant. And to this I'll add an- other Observation, which falls out very unluckily for the Editor's Remark; that tho' Paris is, for the Generality in HOMER call'd ALEXANDER, yet, in this Play of our Author, by any one of the Characers introduced, he is call'd Nothing but PARIS. I gave the Play a frelh Reading all through, on Pnrpofe to confirm my self in this Observation: And it con- vinces me that, by Alexander, the Poet here intended Crffid's Man. Reltore the Paflage therefore, as all the Editions before read it;,Pand. Good morrow, Cofin Creflid: What do you talk of? Good morrow, Alex-,ander; ---. How do yo, Con/in? h'ben were you at Ilium ? IV. I'll now proceed to confider a Conje&ure of the Editor's, which I am very free to Conjeiure re- own is ingeniously urg'd: But there is Something more than Ingenuity requir'd, to guess for soed. the Stage rightly. His Conie'ture is grounded upon a marginal Interpolation, that had crept into the Text of some later Editions, in Dame Quikly's admirable Description of the Man- ner in which Falfjaffe dy'd.,K. HENRY V. Page421.,For after I saw him fumble with the Sheets, and play with Flowers, and,smile upon his Finger's End, I knew there war but one way; for his nose was asjlasrp as a Pen. * His nose was as iharp as a pen, and a table of green fields. h"bef Words, and a table of green fields, are not to be found in the old Editions of 16oo aRn 1608. 7/hi nonfrnc got into all thefollowing Editions by a pleasant mistake of the Stage-Edi- tors, who printed from the common piece-meal written 'arts in the Play-houaf. A Table was here direted to be brought in, (it being afcene in a tavern where they drink at parting,) and this Direlion crept into the text from the margin. Greenfield was the name of the Property-man in that time who fumih'd implements, &. for the afors. A Table of Greenfield's. So far, the Note of the EDITOR. Something more than Ingenuity is wanting, as I said before, to make these ConjeFures pass current; and That is, a competent Knowledge of the Stage and its Cuoms. As to the Hiltory of Greenfield being then Property-Man, whether it was really so, or it be only a gratis dilurm, is a Point which I thall nor contend about. But allowing the marginal Direcion, and supposing that a 'able of Greenfield's was want- ing; I pofitivcly deny that it ever was cultomary (or, that there can be any Occalion for it),U either
ei!-:r in the Prer,:-;r's Book, or piece-meal Parts, where any such Dire&ions are'marginally inferred for the Pr:,erties, or l:.?le'r.:s wanted, to add the Property-Man's Name whole Businers ir was to provide them. The Stage-Neceffaries are always furnifh'd between.the ar.resi-. M mand the Srr:-Kerpsr; and as the Direction is for the Promptor's Use, and if- ie fr om him, there can b no Occaion, as I said, for inferring the Names either of the o:e, or the other. But there is a flonper Obje&ion yet againfl this Conjeaure of the Editor's, in the Man- ner he fupofes i;: W hich he must have tbrefeen, had he had that Acquaintauce with Stage- Bo7:.s, which it has been my Fortune to have. Surely, Mr. POPE cannot imagine, that when Implernen- are wanted in any Scene, the Direfion for them is mark'd in the Mid- dle of that Scne, tho' the Things are to be got ready againll the Beginning of it. No; the Diretions for Erra:ces, and Prworr:ics wanting, are always mark'd in the Book at about a Page in Quantity before the Adsrs quoted are to enter, or the Properties be carried on. And therefore Ge^ixmtELDa's Table can be of no Use rorus for this Scene. 1 gree,indeed,wih Mr. Pope, that there Words might bea Stage-DireAion,and so crept into tie ' eat from the Margin: But, I inlil, that they mufl be a Dire&ion then for the fabfrcuuet Scene, and not for the Scene in ASian. I don't care therefore if I venture my Conjecture too upon the Pafsfge: I'll be fare at leafl, if it be not altogether right, it Ihall not be liable to the sltijd:ty of the ObjeiSsx lai fltruck at. I suppose, with the Editor, that over-againft the Words of the Text, there might be this Marginal Quotation so close to them, that the Ignorance of the Stage-Editors might ealily give them Admittance into the Text.,-.---..-- Nbi A'Jfe s cjbrp as a Chairs, and a Table off. Green perp. Fields. The Scene in Aaion is part of Dame Qicml , the Holtef, her House; and Chairs and Table ere here neceffiry: The following Scene carries us into the French Dominions. I therefore believe This was intended as a Direcion to the Scene-Keepers, to be ready to re- move the Cbas.:r and 7able so soon as the Adors went off; and to shift the Scene, from the TaSrrn, to a Profped of green Felds, representing Part of the French Territories. But what if it should be thought proper to retrac bath Mr. POPE's and my own Conjec- tre, and to allow that these Words, corrupt as they now are, might have belong'd to the Poet's Text? I have an Edition of Sbarefpsre by Me with some Marginal Conjeciures of a Gentleman sometime deceas'd, and he is of the Mind to correa this Paifage thus;,for bis Nfe: o'as asjbrp as a Pen, and a' talked of green Fields. It is certainly obfervabie of People near Death, when they are delirious by a Fever, that they rtal of moving; as it is of Those in a Calenture, that they have their Heads run on green Fields. The Variation from Table to talked is not of a very great Latitude; tho' we may f.1 come nearer to the Traces of the Letters, by restoring it thus;,..--- fir :s Nrcf ias a jbarp as a Pen, and a: babied of green Fields. To bI ., or bat-l, is to mutter, or speak indircriminately, like Children that cannot yet talk, or dying Persons when they are losing the Use of Speech. Fa=:, r? V. Thenext Conje&nre, which I shall produce of the Editors, is likewise upon a cor- ? *_ rzsiedss PSige of the Author; but I am afraid his attempt to cure it is questionable for more,than one Reason.,Frfi Part f HEI .Y IV. Page z2a.,Icm jos'd witb n foos-lb:d rakers, no loug-jlaff-Jixpenny /friers, none of tLofe rams-rnfrscbios-,p rple-bh3ed-raalt worms; but with Nobility and Tranquillity; Burgomasters and gret * ONE-EYERS, &e.,; ? ?up, Onerai-ea, Trrqttie or Ceimmion:esr.,I mutu
I mull own, I am at a Loss about this Conjecture of Mr. POPE'S. GadhIil, the Highwayman, is here boafling to the Chamberlain of'the Inn, that he is in no Fear of hanging; becaufec le is not link'd with a Gang of common little Rogues, but countenanced and born but in his Occupation by the Society of Persons of great Rank; alluding, to Prince Henty's folne- times joining with them in their Robberies. But the Prince was no Trsftee or Cormifioner; nor had they any such link'd with them in their Gang, as I can find any where hinted by the Poet. Nor can I, indeed, conceive how Oneraire comes to signify (or, by Whom bcfidec the Editor it is so interpreted) Truflees or Commiifioers. The Word is apparenltly of Frecrb Termination; and imul have its Derivation from Onus of the Latine: And accordingly the French fay NeJs oneraires, to lignifyShips of Btrthen,for Carriage, &c. and it is always an Ad- jedtive, and is only used, as I know, In those Senses. There is another French Word, which I think would have much more nearly serv'd Mr. POPE's Purpose,. tho' not' have amounted direfcly to his Gloss; and that is, honoraires, i. e. honourable Persons, Persons worthy of honour; and so Cheviliers honoraires, we find, were Such as'were Khights by the Pririledge of their Birth, and not in the Right of any Order. But I am of Opinion that not even this Word rellores us the Poets Text. For supposing SHAKESPEARE himself acquainted with the Meaning of the Term, honoraire; we have noReafon to think he would have put it in the Mouth of so mean a fellow as Gadjhil: No other Part of his Diale& favours of so much Politeness, or Knowledge in Language. If I may interpose my Conje&ure, I believe the Poet's Word here was One much more vulgarly known, and adopted familiarly into our Tongue; and besides, not greatly differing in the literal Part, and much less in the Sound, from the present corrupted Reading. I can't help suspecting that he wrote,,--.-.---- but with Nobility and ltranquillity; Burgomallers, cnd great SEIGNIORS, &c. As have expreft my self desirous, as often as may be, to expound the Author by himself, I espouse this my Conje&ure with the more Willingness, because I find him coupling the fame Terms in another of his Plays. See,,lerchant of VENICE. Page -.,2oar Miodis tofling on the Ocean, '.ere, where your Argofies with portly Sail, Like SEIGNIORS and rich BURGHERS on the Flood, &c. VI. i'll next proceed to examinea few PafTages, in which, as I conceive, Mr. POPE has varioin Rtid- adopted a Various Reading for the worse, and rejeced the better Term. So, in ingdifputedan d,supplicd. CYtBELINE, Page 197.,---------- Ido note, flhat Grief and Patience, rooted in him Both, Mingle their * POW'RS together.,* Spurs. I mull own, I cannot tell for what Reason, unless he did not remember the Signification of the Term, Mr. POPE has degraded Spurs here, and fubflituted Powers in its Place. I am sure, there is much greater Consonancy of the Metaphors, in rooted and Spurs; than.in rooted and Powers. For Spurs do nor only signify those sharp Irons which we wear at our Heels to make a Horse mend his Pace; and those horny Subllances upon a Cock's Legs, with which he wounds his Antagonist in fighting; but likewise the Fibres, or Strings, which shoot out from the Roots of rP7ants and Trees, and give them a Fixure and Firmness in the Earth. Neither Skinner, Cotgrav, nor Baily, remember to mention the Word in this Sense; but SHAKESPEARE knew the Propriety of the Term, and, as Mr. POPE might have observed, has used it in this Signification in his very firR Play.,U X The
The TxMPEST, Page 66.,*---- 7'i froeg-ba"'d Promontory Have I rrma. fjhai; ard by the SPURS pluck'4d tp lTe: Pine and Cedr. I think This therefore a fumcient Authority to rellore this Term in the Paflige now before us, as the molt proper, and expreffire of the Poet's Meaning. VI. K. L. AtR. Page 47.,-------- Strik lher yung Boesr, t INFECTING Air;, with Lamnrf. .,r r n rig Airs. Here again, Ithink, the Edtor has efponfed the worse Reading, and degraded a Term, that has the Authority o molt of the Copies, as wellasis peculiar to the Athor's Sense, and fre- quently uad by him to signify, blaftlg, be.tcbing, &c. Sj, afterwards, in the very Play before us, Page 61.,Edg. Blefi t:e frcm I f'brlwirds, S:ar-blafJing, and TAKING ! So, in the IMES Y WIVES of WISDSOx, Page 300.,dr.d ;thre bl:is b.: Tree, ard TAKES the Cattle. And io in HAMMLET, Page 35-.,7Te ir.h:s are whalejfme, then no Planets Jirike, no Fsiry TAKES, ------ And in feeal other Places: From which it is plain, that.o take, of oldnot only signified to receive; but was equivalent to the areqpr.r of the French, and inradere of the Latins; to Ly hali cs, ctarck, invde. 2Ze L-ie.,VIII . LEAt, Page SS.,I t x r.s; rT, y). Elemirets, with Unkindiefs; I vever gaze yin Ki.gdom, calPd you Children, Ton ve: mer.p SUBMISSION.,. Sbhibipprin. Here agan the Editsr has degraded a Term, which takes Poffeflion of the greatelt Part of the prmted Copies; and one which the Poet chufes to use in other Places, at leall the Verb of it, rather than the more common Word ftbmit. So afterwards :n thi very PLAY, -Page 71.,If IWao s had at thy Gaze ho-Pd that fern tlime, 7rhls ozalfi have said, Good Porter, tmt the Key; --- AU Cr/-lsf s SUBSCRIBE. So in TITus AsDaosicus, Page 4Ss.,Adire thee, Aaron, w'ha s s k e dwe, ,.Ad we S: -,li SUBSCRIBE to t y Advice.,Alld
And so, in TROItLS and CRESSIDA, Page 90.,For Hecor in his Blaze of Wrath SUBSCRIBES To tender Objels; but . He in Heat of AeIion Troilus Is more vindictive tban jealois Love. IX. LEAR, Page 26. T, sik,,---.. ----- Bla/fsand Fogs upon 2Tee! Ih' * UNTENDER Worawdingr of a Father's Curse Pierce ev'ry Sense about thee!,* Untented. I cannot help thinking here again, but that the degraded Word, which is likewise in most of the Copies, is the most expredive, and conveys an Image era0ly suiting with the Poet's Thought. 'Tis true, ruteider fignifiesf&rp, severe, harjb, and all the Opposites to theIdea ostender. Butasa Wound untented is apt to rankleinwards,frmart, andfefler, Ibelieve, Shake- fpeare means to intimate here, that a Father's Curse Ihall be a Wounding of such a jharp, inveterate Nature, that Nothing Rfall be able to tent it, i. e. to search the Bottom, or aflill in the Cure of it. X. K. LEAR, Page 109. Tt 1i,Kent. No, my good Lord, I am the very man --- Lear. 'll fee that jfrait. Kent. That from your Life of Difference, and Decay,,Have follow'd ),our fad Steps. Lear. ------- ron're welcome hither. Kent. * 'TWAS no man else; all's cheerleft, dark, and deadly;,* Nor. I am mightily deceiv'd if Mr. POPE here again, by espousing this Reading, enters into the Poet's Thought, which seems to me to be This. Kent having convinced the old King fir: that he was Kent, and then that he badattended him in Disguise under his Misfortunes, as his Servant Caiu*s; Lear, pleas'd with the Information, fays, You're welcome hither; but Kent, reflecting on the dismal Accidents that surrounded them, fays;,NOR no Man else; --- i. e. Neither I, nor any Man, can be said to be welcome hither, where the Scene is all Ca- lamity. And I want no better Proof to perfuadeMe this is the Genuine Meaning, than the Reasons which Kent immediately subjoins for his faying so: There can be no Inch Thing as Welcome here; for,.-.---.. ---- al's cbeerles, dark, and deadly; Tour eldejf Daughters have fore-done themnfeves, And defp'rately are dead. XI. MIDSuMtMER-NIGHT'S DREAM. Page 145.,Thefl Now is the t MOON iufd between the two Neighbours. Dem. No Remedy, my Lord, when Walls ar .fe wilfuilto her.wihotloaitW raiss t Now is the 4: Moral down between the two Neighbours. Old Edit.,mural. A Burlesque Representation is made, in this odd Play, of the Loves of Pyramns and 7'hisbe; and one Flute a Bellows-mender, properly equipp'd, plays the Part of the Wall, thro' a Cran- ny of which the two Lovers were uled to whisper their Passion. This Part of the Interlude being over, the lWall, for which there was no farther Occalion, goes decently off; upon which, the Pallagc now under Conlderation immediately follows. But how can 7hefeou,be
be fppofed to speak of the Mioo, which has never yet entred? Or, what Relation has Semetrius's Reply, concerning W'aells bein wilful, to kefests's Speech about the lloon? Sure, this would be playing at Cros-purpofes. But I am very apt to think the Poet wrote the Pas- fage-this;,The:f A'o is te MURE ALL dorn bletweer the two- Neighbours. And then Dnoer.strs's Reply is apposite enough. What confirms me that it should be reltor'd thus, is another Paffige afterwards in Page 149.,The MIoonihine ad Lion are left to bsry the dead. Dem. A)., and Wall too. Bot. Aro, I caffre you, the WALL is down, that parted their fathers. The ilMrec (or, Wall) perhaps is a Subflantive of the Poet's own coining from murus of the Lsties. But whether he firil employ'd this Word in Engli/hb or no, 'tls certain he has .used it in another of his Plays; and, possibly ofmer than once. Second Part of K. HESRY IV. Page 366.,f7' :rceffart Care and Labo:Ir cf his Alind Hsth wroughst the MURE that jhonld confine it in, So tbir, that Life looks tbrogbh, and will break out. And so, in the Prologue to TXOLUrs and CRESSIDA, he stiles the Walls of 7roy, the Im- Wogres.,--.---------- and their Vscw is made To rarfack Troy, wi.bin wshfe flrorg IMMURES Trbe ravrf;i Helen, Menelaus' Qfo'en, With wartoa Paris sleeps: and That's the Quarrel. r Ra R-, XII. OTHELLO, Page 493. h esor-d. Of be.ig taker by the irfolent Foe,,Ard fold to Slav'ry; of my Redemntion thence, Ard WITH IT ALL n)y Travels History: * * ris L;7 is rtejred frm tie ot Editin: It ins the rel, -.:- . And POR- TANCE in my Travel's Hiltory 6se. if Pertaoze be in it self a proper and ignificant Term, and a Term of our Author's too, as it pofflees all the other Editions but the firti, we have great Reason to believe it was an Alteration of the Poet's own, and which he thought better than the sirs Reading. SHAKE spiaEa was a fond Imitator of SPESSER's Dicion, who Uses this Word in the very Sense requir'd for it in the Pafage before Us. See his Fairy Qoeen, Bo. 2. Can. 3. Stanz. zt.,------- Eftfoon there flepped forth A goody Lady, clad in Htuter's Weed, 7hba feem'd to be a Wolman of great Worth, And, by ker Jately PORTANCE, born of heav'nly Birth. Mir. HUGHS, in his GlJffar upon this Author, very rightly tells us that Partance signifies Behazc.'zr; from the French, fr porter, to behave ore's self. What does Shakespeare make his Ote!io fay more than this, that he told his Alifrelt of his being taken a Prisoner, his Re- demption, and his Behatiour in the whole Hillory of his Travels ? In the like Signification e find him uing this Word in Another of his Plays.,CoRIO-
CORIOLANUS, Page It. ",With whzat Contempt he wore the humble 'eed, How i, hris Suit he fcorn'tl Tro! But your Love, - Th71nkisg upon his Serzicer, took from rour The Apprehenfon of his preJont PORTANCE, &c. I think therefore Portansce ought to be refor'd, as a Reading of the Poet's own Choice. XIII. I cannot fay ttat in the PafEage, which now comes under Consideration, the Editor Se i' has designedly chore the iwoof Term; fobrthough there be a Various Reading, as he has ta- ken no Notice of it, we cannot fay?.certainly whether he overlook'd or despised it: But- whichever was the Cafe, I think, we may afiirmi, without Scruple, that it ought to be rellor'd to our Author's Text. TROILUS and CRESSIDA, Page 9.,'henIdo tell thee, there my lodes lye drown'd, Reply not in how many fathorms deep nThy lye INTRENCH'D. Besides that, to intrench by Fathomn, is a Phrase which we have very great Reason to fufpe&; what Agreement in Sense is there betwixt drowni'd, and intrench'dl The firlt carries the Idea of Dclru&ion, and the latter of Security: And this Discordance, if I at all underlland the Author, absolutely deltroys his Meaning. All the Editions, that I have seen, read the Pas- fige, as there is no Question but it ought to be reftor'd;,Whien I do tell thee, there my Hopes lye drown'd; Reply not, in how many Fathoms deep They le INDRENCH'D. indrench'd corresponds exatly with drown'd, and signifies immer'd in the Deep, or, as the Poet in another Place calls it, enfieep'd. OIHELLO, Page 0ol.,The gutter'd Rocks, and coogregated Sands, (Traitors enlteep'd to clog the guiltless Kee;) The Editor, here, I don't know for what Reason, subjoins a Doubt whether it ought not to be --- Traitors enur'd to clog, &c. I cannot fee that there is any Need to dilturb the Poet's Text; his own Word is very expressive, and his Meaning as obvious, to wit, That Rocks, and Shoals, lurk under, and lye cover'd by the Deep, treacherously to destroy Vessels which. happen to be thrown upon them. XIV. I shall now address my self to confider a few of the Editor's Gloss, in which he AlifakenGlofi has either miflakeu the Meaning of the Words he would explain, or, where they are epuieo- and Emendat:. cal, has taken the wrong Interpretation to the Prejudice of the Author's Sense. on. MERCHANT of VENICE, Page 8.,0 my Anthonio, I do know of Those, That therefore only are reputed wife, For faying Nothing; who, Pm very sure, If They /houldfpeak,. would almofi t D A M Mthofe Ears, Which, hearing them, would call their Brothers Foolr.,t daunt I cannot pretend to account where Mr. POPE has met with the Word DAtmm to signify, dauit. I cannot find it ever so interpreted: But granting it should be ever used in that Ac-,ceptation
Ceptation, I dare afirm that neither the Word itself, nor its Gloss, ought to have a Place here. Why fhonld one lan's speaking foolilhly be prefum'd to datnt another's Ears ? The D:lcourfe of a Fool naturally makes us laugh at, or deepife him, but does not, as I conceive, put a Damp upon our Spirits. I cannot but wonder the Editor did not trace the Author's Thouagt in this Place, as it is evident he did not, both by the Text, and Gloss upon it; but it leaves me th- Pleasure of explaining, beyond Exception, a Passage, which this ingenious Gentleman did not so much as guess at. Upon the first Reading, I immediately furpected it should be reftor'd, as I since find the fourth folio Edition, and lome other more modern Ones, happen to exhibit it;,------------- who, m very fere If T'ey Jossldfpseak, would aimoft DIAMN t}ofe Ears, 'bichb, b easrig t6he, woud call their Brothers Fools. The Author's Meaning is direcly this; That some People are thought wife, whilst they keep Silence; who, when they open their Mouths, are uIch tiupid Praters, that their Hearers can- not help calling them fals, and so incur the Judgment denounced upon them in the Gospel. It is very familiar with Sbakefipea- to allude to PafTages of Scripture; and it is plain to me, even to Demonfiration, that he had here before his Eye this Text of St. MATTHEW, Ch. S. v. . lAnd -whtfrcerJ/hall fy ro his Brothcr, Raca,all be in danger of the Council: But wbhsfsv.rjs allfay, t'ho Fool, Ihall be in danger of Hell-fire. ~cause I would not afrert any Thing, but what Iwould be willing to second with a Proof, 'll subjoin asew Ithlances, out of a great Number that may be collected, in which our Poet has an Eyeto Sripitre-Hioiry; and Others, inwhich he both alludes to, and quotes the very 7exts from HI-Writ. In AS's welb. t e. -ds well, Page 4. hetalks of Nebucbadnezar's eating Grass; in Love's Lseonr Iss, Page rc4. of Ssamwpi's carrying the City Gates on his Back; in the Merry Wives of WI.djr, Page 3c8. of Gi;ah, and the Weaver's Beam; in K. Richard II. Page i62. of Pilate's Walhing his Hands; in the Frrft Part of K. Henry IV. Page z61, 26z. Flftaffe's Soldiersarecompar'd to Laiaros, and totheProgdal Son; andin the third Part of Henry VI. Page 7. and in Hamlet, Page 391. there is an Allusion to 7eptbhah's Daughter. I'll now quote a few Pafges, in which Texts are either, as I laid, evidently alluded to, orliterally quoted. (l.) ALL'S WELL THAT ESDS WELL, Page 44S- S.M-Vl. I;, 1 'mfar the House witb the narrow Gate, whicb Itae to be too little for Pomp to enter: 4. Some, that hmblet tbernfltves, may; butt the Many will be too chill and tender, and they'l,be fr tbhe lov7y way tbs: kids to tbe broad Gate, and the great Fire. (2.) MLcmC AnD AOUTr NOTHING, Page 48.,Al., all; ;nd mrAtreer, God saw him when he was hid in the Garden. (3.) LovE's LAovUR LOST; Page 136.,Tmo sou-d bis Mote, the King )osr Mote didfee ; B. Ia Beam do fid iu Eachb of frtec. () K. RICURD II. Page 180. -s~. - It is as bErd to com:, as for a Camel ': Sena t2hread t he Poferr of a Needle's Eye.,(y.) Frfl Part of K. HExsRY IV. Page 19s.,nTau dsid well, for Wiaom cries out in the Street, and no Man regards it. ?ror L 10;,(6.) K. HNIaY. V. Page 44S. olCv.xL r-e. i~Le chien efl reiourne a sot propre vomifement, and la ttuie lavee au bourbier. d Pe=. ' (7.) H.AM 22.
(7.) HAMtET, Page 464.,There's special Providence in the Fall of a Sparrow. S.Matt . x XV. FirfiPart of K. HENsRY IV. Page 70o. The Lie.,Worc. ----- For I do protelf,,I have notfought the Day of this IDiflike. King. 2bot havenot fought it, Sir? how comes it then? Falf. Rebellion lay in his Way, and he foard it. Prince. Peace, * CHEVET, peace.,* Chevet, a bolfier. I entirely accord with Mr. POPE, that Chevet is the French Word for a BolRer; but I can't so easily agree that Chevet is SHAKESPEARE'S Word here. Why (hould Prince Harry call Fa/ljaffe. oller, for interposing in the Discourse betwixt the King and Worcefler? With Submission, He does not take him up here for his unreasonable Size, but for his ill-tim'd, un- fedfonable Chattering. I much rather think it ought to be rcllored, as the Generality of the Editions have it, and as the Gentlemen of the Stage, I know, constantly repeat it;,Prince. H. Peace, CHEWET, Peace. --- A lCbege, or uttet, is a noisy chattering Bird; That fort of 'Pie which by the French is call'd Gonbelet. 'I his carries a proper Reproach to Falftaffe for his meddling and imperti- nent Jell; and belides, if the Poet had intended that the Prince Ihould fleer at k/allaffe on Ac- count of his Corpulency, I doubt not but he would have calI'd him Boldler in plain Englis, aid not have wrapp'd up the Abuse in the French Word Chevet. XVI. K. HENRY VIII. Page 478. Te Like.,---------- and which gifts (Saving your mincing,) the Capacity Ofyourfaft * CHIVEREL Conscience wouldreceive, If yon might please to frectch it.,* i.e. Tender,from Cheverillus, a young Cock, a Chirk. It ought tobe reltored --- Cheveril Conscience. --- This Word recurrs in another Place of our Author concerning a wanton, playing Wit. ROXMEO and JULIET, Page Z81.,Oh, here's a Wit of C H E V E R IL, thatfiretches from an Inch narrow to an Ell broad. But in neither of these Palages is Cheveril deriv'd as the Editor supposes. 'Tis true, in BAILY'S Dictionary, we are told that Cheverillius was an old Latine Word for a Cockling, or young Cock. I don't know from what Authority he fays This; for neither Calepine, Ste- vens, Vfirrs, Martinius, Decimator, Buchner, (the old Glossaries, nor the modern Dictio- naries that I have look'd into,) take any Notice of. such a Word. And to this I'll produce a third Pailage from our Author, which I presume will make it evident beyond a Doubt, that Cheveril muit have a different Derivation. TWELFTH-NIGHT. Page So'.,A Sentence is but a CHEVERIL Glove to agood Wit; how inickly the iroeg Side may be turn'd outward. I never yet heard of any Leathermade of a CockrePs Skin, and believe it will hardly come into Experiment in Mr. POPe's, or my Time. In Ihort, Skinner, Cotgrave, and Baily too,,X might
might have inform'd the Editor, as the Truth is, that Chercril Leather is made of the Skin .of a K.i or Go;: nhich was call'd by the L.ATI'S Caprilhit, Caprcllus, and Capreolrs; by the IrTA.Is, C.i-.erelrs; and by the FRENCH, Chevere.l; from which last, our Word Cheir.:l is immediately deduced; so that Cheer.ll is tender, or stretching, from Chevereul, a Kid, or wild Goat. 'c!: L.lr. XVII. This Appendix infenibly frretches out to such a Compass, that I mull be obliged,to aiS- over from mifaaen GiShsi, to Faults of other Kinds. I shall produce one more, how- ever, which is made upon a Word of a double Signification, and where the Editor has hap- pen'd to take it in a Sense, which I believe is very contrary to the Poet's Intention. Se;rid Tar: cf K. HESR. IV. Page 3:6.,Falf. Piltol, I ns;sld: eai:et. Pift. Se- K;::gb:, I K.s hy NEIF.,ndifrsir nrtira, i. e. a TfSma Slave that is born n i n's hsrie. I amnit, with Mr. POPE, that This is one of the Conflrultions of the Word neif; and, ad- mri:ng it to be the proper One here, Mr. POPE must understand that Pi/fol would kits Fal- s/i-''s domefrick iMlifrefs, Del Tearjboet. But I appeal to every One that (hall but read the Scene over, whether This could pofibly be the Poet's Meaning. There is a perfec Fray bentwit Doland Psilsl; She calls him an hundred the worit Names She can think of; He threatensto mnrther her Ruff, and flys, He could tear her: Bardolfe would have him begone; bat He Lays, he'll fee her damn'd firit: and Dl, on the other Hand, wants him to be thrult down Stas, and fays, She cannot endure such a Fustian Rascal. I should very little ex- per that these Parties, in such a Ferment, frould come to kissing: And Iam persuaded SHAKE- SP-EAR thought of no Reconciliation: For the Brawl is kept on, till it rites to drawing Swords; and Piflsl, among 'em, is huntled down Stairs. I cnnot think any more is intended by the Poet than This; that Falflaffe, weary of Pif- ics wrangling, tells him He would be quiet; and that Piflol, who had no Quarrel with Sir Jctr bat a Sort of Deperdance on him, speaks the Knight fair and tells him, that he ' s: Ray .l this Fill; for so, it seems, the Word Neif likewise finifies. * I wonder Mr. POPE did me- SC ue not remember This, when the fame Word (with a small Variation in the Orthography) had r=: cLr-. Fa him in the second Play of our Author, the MIidfrnnmer Aight's Dream, Page 219.,Bott. Givr me thy NEAFIE, MaIorfier Mnflard-Seed; .-- And the Editor there tells us, that ANefe, was a 2Trk/hire Word for Sift. The Identity of Sound may easily deceive us in the Sense of two Ergli/h Words so almost the Same: as well as the different Termination of any two similar Words, in any other Lanu-ge, may, without a particular Care, and Application to the Context. For Want of t'is Caution and Guard, I believe, I can name a signal Inttance, in which Mr. POPE has sus- fer'd himself to be dereiv'd in his Translation of HOMER. In the Et:.b. Book of the ILIAD, just as Teeter has drawn his Arrow to the Head, and is going to let it fy, HIedr discharges a large Stone at him, which both prevents its Flight, and dciibies the Archer:,------- riS' c-- ; A.;; e -,E ? 'A-A t-ol cpra, Ph ^ixrs a.';tt,"c' 'iE;-- NEIP55'OC pin atn, Wnuch PAiage Mr. POPE has thus translated;,-Trbre, were the jnetKr.re bnits the Charel-bore, Tir fariuns Chbef dirb-rg'd the craggy Stone: -Te TENDON burst tber-cb the pondrora Blsm, A.id bi; r.rr.bld Hrd d;fiL;jr'd bir I flefs Bo-w.,Euft.
Ejfiathili, Spnafiimn, Barms, and all the learned World, concurred in a diffcrent Con- itrution of the Palfage, viz. that HeSTor with the Stone broke Tecr's Bowlvlring, and numb'd his Hand violently into the Bargain. And, indeed, when I firlt read Mr. POPE's Translation, I imagin'd that by a Poetical Licence he had call'd the Bowflring the 7Tedon , as in another Place he takes the Liberty to call it the rerve: But his Note, filbjois'd to Lhew that HeCor firuck Teucer jull about the Articulation of the Arm with the Shoulder, which cut the T7endon, or wounded it so, that it loft its Force, foon.convinced me that the Tran- flator had mistaken the Meaning of his Original. It happens very unluckily, for the Discovery of this Miltake, that the fame Accident again happens to feucer in the fifteenth Book of the ILIAD: His Bowilring, indeed, is not broke by the Stroke of a Stone; but as he is directing his Shaft againlt Heaor, YJpiter, by an in- visible Means, causes it to burst, and the Bow to fly out of his Hand.,"'0 'o01 fispO' NETPIH'N iv dg't(otvI T[t 'pE' iT' Ti ip;oDrI' Here again the very fame Words -- ,it o0 ovot -- are repeated, but the Traulnator has ren- der'd them as they ought to be.,At his full Stretch as the tough STRING he drew, Struck by an Arm unseen IT bhrft in two. efecer, immediately dilhearten'd at the Difaltcr, complains of the Loss of a Bowfring, with which he hop'd to do so much Execution, and which he had but that Morning affix'd for the Service of the Day:,,-------------- -v of ISta npssi'ov. Ejftath;lis fays Something so remarkable upon this Place, that Mr. T ' sr fsv, rl; i Eps» I.ys ol POPE could not poflibly have made the Millake uponthe formerPaffage, i;tP; o au i, x; ' ov T'ic;. F ar;o if lie had attended to the Commeintator's Words here. Teucer obfcr- a'p, ' TpiPo v w°ivi? Ti ,-svo, a& ingi that he had ;ew-jirungihisBowa thatmorning, fays he, callsto hisRe- ~ o'eir-v iv i'e v ''4 su.. remmbranre his former M'istortune of having his Bowltring burfi by the Euf"tl- Romae Pg.- Il02S Stroke of a Stone. It is plain in the firlt Passage Mr. POPE underltands n,;oV in the Sense ofv,_psr or the Nerve of the Body. I cannot remember that it is ever employ'd in that Signification by any Author whatsoever: But This I know well and can aflure Mr. POPE, if he has not yet obferv'd it, that, as often as HOMER has used vfusi| either in the Iliad or Od)eity, it fignifiei in Him nothing but a Bouwfring. This is a Digreflion from the Btjinefs of SHAKXPEARE, but One that a Sameness of Er- ror naturally introduc'd; and I hope it will be pardolable, as it sets right a Passage, in which Many may be mifed by the Authority of the Translator's N ame. XVIII. I Ihall now proceed to give a Specimen of some few Passages, in which the point- Bad Poi.rtigs ing is so unfufferably bad, that the Poet's Sense is not only maim'd, but quite Rliled. And recatie3. yet as the Editor in These has follow'd the Pattern set him in the old Editions, the Continu- ation of Error cannot be supposed thro' Negligence, but because he would not please either to fufpec a Fault, or to indulge his private Sense in curing it. There are so many signal Blots of this Sort left, that, to point at them all, would be to extend this Work totenTimcs the Compass it has already taken up: I (hall therefore only cull out such a Parcel, as may demonstrate how far SHAKESPEARE wants reloring in this Particular. TROILUS and CRESSIDA, Page 74.,lEne. And thou jhalt bunt a Lion that will flit,With his Face back in human gentleness: Welcome to Troy --- Now, by Anchises' Life5 WelfYeoe indeed ---,X Thus
Thus this Pait'ge has all along been read, and never understood, as I suppose, by any of the Editors. Th.e iecond and fourth S51:o Editions make a small Variation of the Pointing, but do not at all mend the Matter. I don't know what Conception the Editors have had to them- feives of a L.:;'s frli:g ir: :reiare Gei;tler.es: To MIe, I confess, it seems Itrange Stuff. If a Lion nfy with his Face turn'd backward, it is fighting all the Way in his Retreat: And in this Manner it is LAesJ profefles that He hall fly, when he's hunted. But where then mre mie Srmptoms of hn :atre Ger.:lSenf? Mr. DRYDEN, in his Alteration of this Play from S-A EsE .RiE, has aited with great Ciauion upon this Passage: For not giving himself the Trouble to trac e tre Ahor's Ieaning, or to recify the Mistake of his Editors, he closes t:s Senrence at --- .::b 5 is Jfe backi.l ard; and entirely leaves out, in bhuanne Gentlenefl. In irt, the Place is fiat Nonsense as it flands, only tor Want of true Pointing. I think, thee is no Quef-ion to be made, but that SHAKESPEARE intended it thus;,Ae.i Tl;y. jbl b-i:t s Lis, thaJ will file lf'i:b bh Face back. --- In bhm.ane Gentslrenr, l{e!.oms ts Troy; --- NAo, by Anchises' Life, l{liel:!e i:ieed: --- sr.i, as soon as ever he has return'd iiamede's Brave; flops hort and corrects himfelffor erprefling so much Fury in a Time of Truce; from the fierce Soldier becomes the Courtier at once and, remembring his Enemy as a Guest and an Ambafiador, welcomes him as such to the t'ro'i Camp. This Correction, which I have here made, flight as it is, not only refiorcs good Sense, but admirably keeps up the Charaaer which nei had before given to Agan:,r.rn of his Trojan Nation, Page -7.,Ca:irriers a frce, as dbie:;r, :nn;rm'd, As benir.g Argels; tba's tbher Famne in peace: Bz *hetr. they x:s:d freor SoLiers, they haze Galls, Gasd Arons, firosg JCits, true Swords, and Jove's Accord, _sosr:hi.fjo:!l of Heart. ...c'..r- Tnis Quotation obliges me to make a short Stop, to set right the latter Part of this Pas- rt-t.';-. fae; whose Sense is likewrife bad, thro' a small Defect in the Pointing. Can the Poet be,fuApofed tO meanth tth he roaes had Joz;e's Accord, whenever they would seem Soldiers? Na; ce.tainly he would intimate, that Nothing was so full of Heart as They, when that God did bat ftfew himself on their Side. This Circumilance added, brings no Impeachment to thir Courage: Valour would become Presumption aud Impiety in them, if they trulted to it, when j7oe manifeflly declared himself on the other Side. It ought to be pointed and nnierflood thus;,Bt -bher They -ase:ld frei Soldaers, they have Galls, God Arnms, firos.g Jints, tree Swords; and, Jove's Accord, Nothi,.g f f,nll of Heart. i. e. y.:'s Accord, and Concurrence, seconding them, Nothinig so full of Heart as They. ., L3e. .XIX. T.oiLtus and CREssIDA, Page 9.,---:-- - I ;:tl tbee, I arm ira Ir Crefid's live. TZoe asfwerfl, /he is fair, Po:.r'jt ir the cpein uker of my Heart; Her eces, khr h-r, her creek, her gate, her woire Hasediefj ir thby Ifrcorf --- 0 that! her hand! -- Any Body with half an Eve must perceive the Pointing to be diiturb'd here; and that the Se- micolon at the End of the third Verse quite destroys the Meaning of the Passage. Restore i; thus;,y--I
...---. - I tell thee, I am mad In Creffid's Love: 'host anfwerft, She i; fiir; Pour's in the open Ulcer of my Heart Her Eyes, her Hair, her Cheek, her Gate, her Vice ; Handleft in thy Difcotirfe - - 0 that ! her Hand! ,. e. When I am already wounded to the Heart with her Beauties, you inflame my Wound with the Repetition and Praise of their Particulars; or to use the Poet's own Words in the Close of the Speech;,Bntfaying thus, inflead of oil and balm, Thouc lay'Jl, in ev'ry GaJn that Love hasgiv'n me, The Knife that made it. But 1 cannot dirmifs the Palfage, whose Pointing I have cur'd, without subjoining a Con- jeaure on the last Line of it.,Handlejf in thy Discourse -- 0 that ! her hand! Oee.foa l,Conjeneurec I have always (notwithltanding the whole Set of printed Copies support the Reading;) sus- pe&ed this odd Interjeation of Rapture, - - O that! and cannot help thinking it is an in- elegant Break, as I am sure it is an ill-founding one. Without departing very widely from the Letters of the Text, I mult own I should like it better, if it stood thus;,Handleft in thy Discourse -- how white her hand! And then, methinks, by the Repetition of the Term, the Versa immediately following ac- quires a double Beauty.,In whose Comparison all whites are Ink, Writing their own Reproach! XX. CMBhsELINE, Page 170. Ih i,----------- Tot good Gods, Let what is here contain'd reli;h of Love, Of my lords health, of his content, yet not 'hat we two are afirnder; let that grieve him: Some Griefs are mediciinable, that is one of them, For it doth phylick love of his Content, All bht in that. Certainly this Paflige could not be underflood by the Editor, or he would never have pointed it thus: The Foundation of the Speech is this: Imogen, a young Princess, receiving a Let- ter from her banilh'd Lord whom lhe passionately lov'd, before Ihe opens it, prays that the Contents of it may Ihew that her Lord fill loves her, that he is in Health, and that he talles Content: Yet, fays She, as it were recollecing her self, let him not talle a full and absolute Content; let it give him some Grief, that Fate has divided Him and Me; for That's a Grief which will exercise and support his Love; but in every other Circumflance let him enjoy Content at Heart. This, I dire fay, is direcly the Author's Meaning; and that the Point- ing ought to be restored thus.,--- Vipa
------- 2;i: gcsd Godr, Let Wh;: is here crstia'd reliJfj of Love, Of 'i Lsra's HseI:, of his Csrtent, -- (yet not, TIa lJ: W f T are af-ir.rdr; let bhat grieve Him : Sijr: Griefs are Tn.i'cin.;sl ; bshar is One of Them, F.r i d.hb pbfick Ls-:.) -- of his Content, All bk; in Th:a ! Irn:gen, as it is very frequent with our Poet upon other Occasions, breaks in upon the Thread of her own Address to the Gods, interposes 3 Reflection, and moralizes upon it; and then resumes the Substance of her Prayer at the very Words where She left it off. She catches hersef up in the fame manner in the very next Page.,-------- Ther, tre Pisanio, Wci lsr.gfl like Me to fee tby Lord; who long'fl, (Oh.! et: me I::) -- bih s;st like Me; yet long'ft, B;:t i a fan:er kind: -- Oh! not like Me. 3 eL it. ;XXI. Tanos of ATHESS, Page '. ',2%a Fosls of Fortnne, trencher-friends, time-fi;es, Caqr-.Ie-he Sir-es, ovapors, and minute-jacks Of man and b=as; :;: irfinite milady Criljys ' qri::e o'er! --- I always fufipned the Pointing of this Passage; Mr. SHADWELL, who alter'd this Play, seers not to have underflood it, and therefore has left out Part. But in what Sense were these ungratef-l Senators llisn:e-3J.cks of cMan and Beaftl The Poet just before calls them Vapours, and I dare fay means to inforce that Image, by faying they were jacks not of a Minute's Trall, or Dependance. Then what does the infinite Malady signify, without Something following to give us a clearer Idea of it? I am in no Doubt, but the Poet ought to be relor'd thus;,7Tu ' Fools of Fsr::ne, Trencher-friends, inme-fiies, Cap:s;d-hxee Slaves, Vapours, and Mlirite-jacb, -- Of Man andr B;es; the infinite Maaldy Crr.fi 2To quite o'er!,* ·erbp s. Tools. i.e. May the whole Catalogue, the infinite Number of Distempers that have ever invaded either Man or Beail, all be join'd to plague You. ', .r:e, XXII. ai.. Page S.,------- Shaes andfools Plsuck the rsave -rinkled Senate frro the bercb, And min.:ster in their fleads to general filths. Csr-,rt o'tb'infla.:n green, Virginity, Do't .inyo:r. r aren:s eyes. This Ptahge is so disfurniin'd of all Sense by the bad Pointing, that I am willing to think it One of Those which were never revised by the Editor. 'Tis true, the old Copies are faulty too in the Pointing; but if Mr. POPE had catl his Eye on Mr. SHADWELL here, he would not have wanted Direaion for reforming it in Part. Restore the whole thus;,--- Slaves
:..----- Slaves and Fools, TPlick the grave wrinkled Senate from the Bench, And minifler in their Steads. -- 7o gen'ral Filths Convert o'th'injlant, green Virginity; Do't in your Parents Eyes. i. e. You Virgins, that are scarce ripe for Man, turn at once such Ihamelefs Proflitutes, as to commit Whoredom even before your Parents faces. XXIII. CORIOLANUS, Page 107. The Likt.,All the contagion of the fonth light on yon, Toujhames of Rome; you herds; of boils and Plagues Plaister you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd Farther than jee, --- Here, again, the old Copies are defe&ive in the Pointing, by which the Sense is so maim'd, that this too mull be a Passage which either was not revis'd by Mr. PoPe, or in which he would not indulge his private Sense to make it intelligible. Mr. DENNIS, who has alter'd this Play, was obliged, by a different Difpolition of the Fable, to leave out this Passage, otherwise, 1 am persuaded there would have been no Room for my making a Correcion upon it. The meanell Judges of EngliJh mut be aware, that no Member of any Sentence can begin with a Genitive Cafe, and a preceding Nominative be wanting to govern That and the Verb. Where, therefore, is the Nominative to -- of Boils and Plagues plai/fer rou o'er? Or what Sense or Syntax is there in the Passage, as it now fiands ? Relore it without the leal Doubt,,All the Contagion of the South light onyor, Tre Shames of Rome, on ! -- Herds of Boils and 'Plagure 'Plaifer you o'er, that you may he abhorr'd Farther than ee ! - - It is not infrequent with SHAKESPEARE to redouble his Pronouns, as in this Place; So, ANDRONICUS, Page jS3.,Oh, why hould Wrath be mute, and Fury dumb? I am no Baby, I; that with base Pray'rs Ijihould repent the Evil I have done: So, ROMEO and JULIET, Page 290.,Mens Eyes were made to look, and let them gaze; I will not budge for no Mait's Plefuire, I. And so in a Number of Inltances more. XXIV. Ibid. Page 128.,---------- This, asyoljfay,fiiggefled Atfome time, when his soaring insolence Shall teach the people, which (time iall not want, If he be put upon't, and tht's as ea/ie, As te set dogs on Ibeep) will beeth fire Tokindle their dry fl le; and theirblato Shall darken him for ever.,As
As in he lat Infatnce a Noainarive was wanting to the Verb, so, on the other hand, as this PaI.'-eis pinted, we have a Redundance; for Both the Pronouns, this and whi.., fland as Noi natives to wil! be. The whole Passage ought to be refified thus;,T-- i. I:; l, :,frgzg d A.4: fse T7::, wheor. i:s si9:rng Irfolence S-:'!J :-'th :'- PeSc9, (:v5:rh Tie: Ja1ll ;ot waint, If H:fie b,:!' ::^?r '; a; ' rSa s as et z, As :, j' D$s oa Sc.cp: ) ,n:ll be the Fire TI kind!: tbeir idr S!:ft;:; and tbeir Bai;ze Ssl r.i.r.k': him fir e.:r. O ----l Tfnere is one Word, however, still in this Sentence, which, notwithltanding the Concur- car :we-. rence of the printed Copies, I fifpei to have admitted a finall Corruption. Why Ihould it,be impuerd as a Crime to Csrli/;c.:s, that he was prompt to teacb the People? or how was i: alv Laring Insolence in a Pc:ric:.w to attempt this ? 1 believe rather that the Poet wrote;, . ... l irc: Ihis fooin lifilci;e S!I reach t:e Pe;!te, e. C Wn-. it frall extend to impeach the Condna, or touch the Charaser of the People. T;. E :. XXV. ASTONY C;:. CLEOPAT.A, p.40o.,.......L:-- - , fj:fri;:. : I cGsc rrc''.; :i e, -:; is g tkdsg *To v.'5. :he c':s of- Kings. T- ' Speech is made by Oasv.s Ccfir, on V Sercetas's bringing him Word of Anstony's -rt t:. D..D-;, arn bri-ging the Svord which he had drawn forth from his Wounds. Is there any,-. -t_ Reas.o in This why Oawr-i:s fhiould call his Friends fadfriendr? The Poet's Sense, me- .'- " -i:-.--. thiniks, is ver. obvious, and the Cure easy. OSanvis enjoins his Friends to be concern'd at }-,- -ss ts'e \ews; and tells them it is a Calamity, that ought to draw Tears even from the Eyes of f-_.t: Princes. Cocrec therefore,,-'^-t =-;:i ------ Lsk '-:,A.faj, Friends:--- T: esSo- To -wJh the :eCs of Kings. ar- :f- X-XVI. Jt-LI-s Cs.E.5A, p. 63. Bg-? : ' O'r resf;:s ere fifsll of good regard, BEa_-:s, Po'- .T',SS -w-sre: i Antony tbe San of Cefar, roa sr sPoc:. 2%fscJho:ld b efa;issied. ~i- zi:. The true Pointing f this Place must likewise be obvious at the firil View, but the Neglea of,it p-:s fich a Change upon our Poet's Sense, that it makes him suppose Cefar had a Son vrhof= Name was An-:r.; a Point of History altogether new to the World. It muds be refdioed;,Tet -=ere Ts:i, Antony, the Ssn of Ctfar, 2TJbarsldl befis sisd. e:-:-r. - XXVII. Another Negligence of this Sort occurs in the MERCtANT of VE NICE, by,which a Civilin and Pleaderis turn'd into a Lord, p. 6S.,Duke. C_-z: T5n from Padua, frm Bellario ? . N e. Frrs i'.:sh: ,;:;' L:rd B:i!ariogree:s j o;r Gra e.,Tle
The Duke within half a Page above tells us the Profeflion of this Bellario, and that, unless he comes, he may by his own Power put off the Tryal.,Upon my Power I may d;fmifs this Court, Unless Bellario, a learned DOCTOR, IWhem I have ent for to determine This, Come here to day. The Passage before Us, therefore, must be restored thus;,Duke. Came Tounfrom Padua, from Bellario? Ner. From Both, my Lord: --- Bellario greets your Grace. XXVIII. As in the last Pafage, by the false Pointing, a Dotor of Laws was promoted The Like. to the Peerage; so in King LEAR, by thelame Accident, a Physician riles to the fameHonour, P.93.,Cordel. ------ Then be ifto.,Mly Lord, how does the King? Phyf. Madam, sleeps jfill. Cordelia entring with the Earl of Kent anud the King her Father's Physician, desires Kent to flift out of his Disguise ot Servitude; who begging to go his own way a little longer, Cor- delia consents it Ihall be as his Lordship pleafts; and then addressing herself to the Phylician, enquires after her Father's Health. It ought to be reltor'd thus;,Cord. ----- Thei be itfo,,lly Lord. --- How does the King? Phyf. ------ Mladam, feepsjflill. XXIX. But before I difinifs the Errors of false Pointing, I'll produce one Initance of T',e ,ie, anl more Importance; beccauf it is plain the Editor has not made comnon Sense of it; and be- Emendation. cause, I believe, it has never yet been underflood by any body, since the firfl Corruption of it in the old Copies. CYMBnELINE, P.lI8.,------- tf'ouldyou in their erving, And with what imitation you can borrow From youth of fuoch afeafon, before Lucius Prefintyonrfelf, desire hilfervice; tel! him Wherein you're happy, which will make him KNOW, If that his head have ear in mufick, doubtllef With joy he will embrace you; It is evident, I fay, that this Pafiage is faulty both in the Pointing and the Text. Which will make him know --- What? --- What Connecion has This with the reft of the Sentence?' Surely, SHAKESPEARE can't be suspected of so bald a Meaning as This; If yu'll tell him wherein you're happy, that will ntake him know wherein you're happy: --- and yet This is the only Meaning, I think, the Words can carry, as they now 1tand. In Ihort, I take the Poet's Sense to he Thiis. Pifanio tells Imogen, if (he would disguise herfelfin the Habit of a Youth, present herself before Lucius the Roman General, offer her Service, and tell him wherein the was happy, i. e. what an excellent Talent Ihe had in Singing, he would certainly be glad to receive her. Afterwards in p. 196, 7. Bellarinr and Arviragrr, talkihg of Imogen, givethis Description of her.,Bell. T'his routh, howe'er difrefJ'd, appears to have had,Good Ancestors. Arv. -- How Angel-like hi sings! Y I
I doubt not therefore bnt, upon this Foundation, the entire Passage ought to be restored thus;,-------- rld c in tihe ir S:rz.Sig, And cain :-'. - L.i;:."i:. )yoz crm abrros Frsm r 2-s;b f rfibch a Safir., brjre Lucius Pref.,: 3-;!r s.is, defre bh; Service, tell hii Wlhberei:; 2Ts're haip'; (which will rake hir, SO, If ci': bis Iea.2d ha:e Ear irn AUIf:,) doubtless IT'.rb Jyj : -e Jl emsrasc 2Tos: -_ -._..-. X-XX. I muil no-w pass over to another Species of Errors, not infrequent in this Edition,,- which I cnnot otherwise diliinguif than by the Title of Transpositions; that is, either,where the Verses are so transposed and taken to Pieces, -that the Numbers are unnecessarily disjointed; where wrong Names have been prefix'd to the Parties speaking, or Parts of Sen- tences p!ac'd to one Speaker, that ought to belong to the Person answering; or where Stage- Direfaions are either mifphlc'd, or erroneously adopted into the Text. I ihall content my self wiih very few Inliances, in present, of each Sort, because I am hastening to conclude; a-d because this Work his already fweli'd beyond the Size of a reasonable Specimen. Tr'-r:'n= a r nThe diimounting a few Verses, indeed, where the Sense of them remains unbroken, is,- not a mrtter of the eatelt Consequence; yet, I think, ought not to have been done, where,it is altogether unneceflary, and might ealily be prevented. I shall quote but two Examples, ad Both of them out of the fame Play; where 'tis plain there was no Occasion for break- ing the Numbers. TROILUS and CxESSID.A P-ge 3S.,Hecor. Bcterr, S'c. is no:st srt,IWhat She d:.b crf :;te khoktig. Troi!. IJ'a:'s ceghc, bz' as 'tis -alked. Hzre are three Hemifrichs made out of Words that, with a very flight Variation, naturally fall into two compleat Verses.,Hec. Brct^er, She is rnt w-rtb what She doh: cct,The: h!dig. Troil. ----- I...: is ah: be: a s 'tis rvaled? So agin: -frerwards, Page S9.,'Ti di.e like Heaor, but fecurelv' dgse, A ittle proridl, ai: great deal mripriring 7te Knight ppos'd. JEne. If r - Achilles, Sir, w-ba is yo:.r Name? Achil. If r.: Achilles, n.o:ing. Here two Hemistichs are made by a Break in the Verlfication altogether unnecessary: Re- alore the Numbers thus;,'lis droe like Hetor, but fecrrely done, A lit'le proudly, and great deal mipriivng fbe Kr.itgb cGcrs'd. .Ee. .--- If not Achilles, Sir,,hakt' is your Nare ? Achil. --- If not Achilles, nothing. XXx.,XXXI.
XXXI. TIMOs of ATHENS, Page 6S, 9. Tranfpofintons Tim. UWonld thoat were clean enourgh to spit upoi;. Nao P ns Apem. A .Plague on thee. flWon art too bad to curje. It seems clear to Me that the Divilion of thecr Speeches is milhaken: There is such a Con- tradiction in Sense in the second Line. If Timon was too bad to curse, why then does Apemanntis curse him? I think, it would be more reafonableto split the Speeches thus;,Tim. WUonUl Thou wert clean enough tofpit upon.,A Plague on 7bee ! --- Apem. --- Thou art too badto curfr. XXXII. TIrus ANDRoSIcus, Page 497. Aaron. 7'otch not the Boy, he is of royal Bloodl. Luc. 7oo like the Sire for ever being good.,Firfi hang the Child, that he rmay fe it fprall, A Sight to vex the father's Soul withal. Aaron. Get me a Ladder, Lucius, save the Child; &c. Why flou!d Aaron, the Moor, here ask for a Ladder, who earnelily wanted to have his Child fav'd? Unless the Poet is fuppos'd to mean for Aaron, that i. they would get him a Ladder, he would resolutely hang himself out of the Way, so they would spare the Child. But I much rather suspect there is an old Error in prefixing the Names of the Pcrfons, and that it ought to be corrected thus;,Aar. Touch not the Boy, he is of royal Blood. L'c. Too like the Sire for ever beiig good.,Firfl hang the Child, that he may fee it prall, A Sight to vex the Father's Soul withal. Get me a Ladder. --- Aar. ------ Lucius, Jave the Child; &c. XXXIII. TROILUS and CRESSIDA, Page S9. ke Like. Agam. ----- which -way wvawuld Heaor have it? iEnc. Hle cares not; He'll obey Coniondio. AGAM. Tis done like Hefor, but jecHrely done,,A little proudly, and great deal misprizing The Knight oppos'd. TEne. ----- If not Achilles, Sir,,What is )our Name? Achil. ----- If not Achilles, Nothing. JEne. Therefore, Achilles; but whate'er, know this,,In the Extremity of great and little Valour and Pride excel themselves in Hector. I mull confels I could not read this Palage at firls without ltopping, and a Suspicion that the Names of the Charatcrs were not all rightly prefiz'd to there Speeches. It fcem'd vcry ab- surd to Me, however the Editor has taken it upon Content, that Aganmenion Ilould make a Rempark to the Disparagement of Hector for Pride, and that .ineat hould immiediately.fly, If nort Achilles, Sir, what is your Name ? and then desire him to take Notice that Heaor Was as void of Pride as he was full of Valour. Why was Achilles to take Notice of This, if it was AgaSemiioan that threws this Imputation of Pride in Hlebor's Teeth? I was fully satis-,Y fled
sied that this Reproach on Hecdsr ought to be plac'd to Achilles: And consulting Mr. Dr- nEs's Alteration of this Play, (which, I suppose, Mr. POPE did not look into, while he.was pnubliffing Srstkeare,,) I was not a little pleas'd to find that I had but seconded the Opinion of That Great Man in this Point: Corre& the Paflage therefore,,Agsm. W---- cb Way would Heaor have it. iuEns. He csre; no:; He'll obey Conditions. ACHIL. T.s doe like Hecor, bt fJecirely done;,A ltle: proudly, &c. T'. Lire. XXXIV. IiEASURE for ME-SURE, Page 3Z5.,Lunro. Bebld, behLd, s where Miadsm Mitigation come;.,I are prrcbas'd as may Diseases under r Roof As come to --- zd. Gent. To what, prsy,Lucio. 7Jale.--- *d. Gent. lo three tbotufard DollsIr a 2ear. it. Gent. Ay, cad more. Ludci. A French Crowa rrre. i5. Gent. Thou art always figuring Diseases in Me; but Thou art full of Error; I am,found. Not to dwell upon Explanation here, whoever reads this Passage but once over, I dare fay, will be convinc'd from the laIl Speech in it quoted, that all which is plac'd to Lecio in his firt Speech could never be intended to belong to him. It must be reRfor'd, as the Sense of the Contest requires.,Lucio. Bebo!l, behold, whbre lladam Mitigation comes. ió. Gent. I hs- psrrchs'd as many Diseases undir her Roof,,AS crme to, &c. xr g., YXXXV. TA.MSG of the SHREW, Page 317.,Hort. ----- I' l rb w :ch u better yet.,In time I rma) be-.lece, yet I mifrnr:jt.. Bian. I.firJf i: in5: Fr firre Eacides,Was Aja, caPd soo fror: h;s Grardfather. I r.Zfi bel.e::e my Mlsfter, else I pro;nfe Ton, &c. Here, indeed, the Names are so fnuefed and displaced, that I muf be obliged to explain the Business of the Scene, before I can convince that there has been a manifclt 7ranfpofition. Bia-a is conrted by two Gentlemen, Horternio and Lucentio, who make Way for their Ad- reflss under the Disguise of Matlers, the One to inltruc her in Latine, the other in Mu- sick. Lscerti, as he is teaching her Language, informs her who he is, and to what Pur- pose he comes: She Lays, She'll confrue the Lesson her self, and, in so doing, Ihe tells him, She does not know him, does not trulf him, bids him take Heed that Hortenfio do not over- h-er them, and neither to prefame, nor to despair. Hortenfio is jealous that Lucentio is, li-e himself, aLover in Disguise, and Lfas he'll watch Him. After this, Biarca and Lsu- -cenr proceed in their Discourse, under Colour of continuing the Lesson; and there is no &dubt at that the Speeches ought to be diltinguifh'd thus;,Hort
Hort. ------ Pit watch rou better yet. BIAN. 'In lme Imay believe; yet I sifnrufl. [To Luc. LUC. Miflrul/ it not: ---- for sure JEacides,Was Ajax, cal'dfo from his Grandfather. BIAN. Imufl believe my Mafler, efe &c. XXXVI. ANTONY and CLEOPATRA, Page 311. 2li Lkr. Char. Our worser thoughts heav'n mend. ALEX. Come, his fortune, hi fortune. 0 let him marry a Woman that cannot go, sweet,Isis, I beseech thee, and let her die too, ad give him a worse, &c. This I dare pronounce to be To palpable, and signal a ranfpofition, that I cannot but wonder it Ihould flip the Editor's Observation. Alexas brings a Fortune-Teller to Iras and Char- mian, Cleopatra's Women, and fays himself, 'We'll know all our Fortuner. Well; the Snoth- fiyer begins with the Women, and some Joakes pals upon the Subje& of Husbands and ChaRtity; after which, as I apprehend, the Women hoping for the Satisfa&ion of having Something to laugh at in Alexas's Fortune, call to him to hold out his Hand, and wish hearti- ly he may have the Prognoltication of Cuckoldom upon him: ReRore therefore the Pas- rage:,Char. Our worser Thoughts Heav'n mend! Alexas, -- come, hit fortune, his fortune, -' I think, there needs no stronger Proof of this being a true Correaion, than this Observation which Alexas immediately subjoins on their Wilhes and Zeal to hear him abused.,Alex. Lo now! if it lay in their hands to male me a Cuckold, they would maRe them-,selves W rhores, but they'd do't! XXXVII. The EDITOR has complain'd in his Preface, Page IS. that, often in the old Stage-Direci- Impressions, the Notes of fDiretion to the Property-Men for their Mloveables, and to the on crerp ir.i Players for their Entries, are inserted into the Text, thro' the Ignorance of the Transcribers. the Tex. I am afraid, he has not taken Care to remove all these wrong Insertions; and I believe the Inilance I am about to subjoin will be determined One of Those which ought not to have efcap'd his Observation. MACBEETH, Page f94.,I 'gin to be a wear), of the Sun, And wi/h the State o'th'World were now undone. Ring the alarum-bell, blow wind, come H1rack, At leafI we'll dye with Harneft on our Back. Iacbeth, feeing that he cannot be safe within his Fortifications, resolves to issue out upon the Enemy. But in abefieg'd Town, is it ever cuRfomary to order an Alarum, or Sally, by the ringing of a Bell? Or rather is not this Business always done by Beat of Drum? Hieronymus Magiur, I know, in an accurate and scarce Tra& of his upon the Antiquity and various Use of BELLS, speaks, among the rel, of a Tintirnabilulam Catrenre, or Great Bell used in Camps. " Within tlte Periol of Chriflianity, fays He, and after Great Bells obtain'd in Churches, the Commanders of Armies mploy'd Such a One flungina Wood- en Turret at the Top of a large Chariot; which Chariot was always plac'd near the Pa. " viliou, and every day, at the Riling and Setting of the Sun. this Bell was rung out as a " Notice to the Army to perform their Devotions; instead of,Sounding the Charge, lil;ewie " the Soldiers were call'd to Arms by this Bell; and in the Battle, it was placed in the ' Middle of the Army, and defended with the fame Care as they are used to do a Standard . The Author concludes his Account of this Military Bell, with faying, 7Tat if any other Na,tions
t'::, left.is tl' I'liins, i:.:-l :. ,f sa:c a 3L:.e i: in their Camps, it was more than le h'-?. ' WVe may dare afterr, at leafl, that it never found an Introducion into Scotland; and t;: tetrefor e th; Poet could not make a'acrbth employ it, inllead of the customary Way of cir::ngC a C arge npon the Enemy. In 1ihjt, I b!i eve these Words w re a S:&ge-D;rediin crept from the Margin.intotheTexst t:rj' ;h; .lit i ; bOt One01 bdin, deficient without them, occafion'd probably by a Cut that hfti be inid; in the Spesch by the Actors. They were a Memorandum to the Prompror to ring the ,.Cri.;:-.'J i. e. the Bell, perhaps at that Time used, to warn the Tragedy-Drumr -_- I:i:;::Si to bS ready to found an Alarm: And what confirms me in this Sulpicion, is, th.: .fri the four Pages imeUitely following, it is all along quoted in the Margin, Alarusm; fiE< and Alari:'ir;z; cn[ri:':.;'r:intd. It may b objeced, indeed, to this Observation of mine, that the fame Expreflion is to be .ti wtoh . efore in this very Play; and therefore we mull examine that Passage; 1-. Page -3- .liacd. Ring te Alarrcm Bell --- M.1mthr, aned 'freafi; n,Bc.nqco, cZ'dDonabaine! Malcolme! awai-! I do Ens: difS;te these Words here being a genuine Part of the Text ; because the Reason for rt-n is ve-Cv ciLfSrci. The Scene is in Alaarb;h's Cafile at Inzernefi; whither the King goes to pr: : Vii;. .L-'.-:' ries earl. being so order'd, to call up the King; and discovering hln ro be mu-.lr'c, ocer -s tBeill to brung out, to wal;e his Maiter's Sons, and tic reft of t-e Court, to 'pprize them or the dimial Accident. The Bell was entirely proper un -'ts O-cacn; -s ; is, to this dCy, employ'd in great Houses to call together Afiftance i Ca..i of ic..-:cs or F;r. - XXXVII. We come now to a S:-re-Direiln. very unluckily misplaced; in which the S' iX -· . t El-:::'r Seems to have been inified by ite finall Edition, formerly publilh'd by Mr. Taoioi,,ct wan. of a competent Kn-vwie'ge of the Cujfiois of the Stage. S.:C. 2Part if K. HESIY VI. Page i-o. FLOURISH. Eat-r l-sehcr Jordan, Hume, Southwel, andBolingbroke. T'i-s s re firi latance, as take it, where Conjurers and common Witches are supposed t.o : ufr.r'd into the Scene by the Sound of Trumpet; which is fgnified by the Word PS .-r.j. The Truth of the Cafe is this; whenever a King enters or goes off with his Court :: ";- zconfiart P-raiic of the Stage to sis :;r:jl hi;n a; :id off. In the Scene immediately :-ccecrgi Tis of the Conjurrs, K. H::-cr VI. and his Court are upon the Stage; and ;.-v.'hn th'v cC. i:, ia the feondjf!. Edition, and other old Books, we find it mark'd thus, s i: mcft certainly ought to be reftor'd;,Flowirisl. Exeunt. E,.-:Tr 3Irr Jord3an Hume, Southwel, an. Bolingbroke. . sn th.:r, in thi e iove lance, committed a Miflake by departing from the older Co- .:-- I beilCve, I can point out another Place, in which he has err'd with some of those Co- P'. ' b",e5in Wthe Word fzr.j& where it ought by no Means to be admitted. K. RicsAsD III. Pge 349. The Court. ELOURISH. Erntr Kil, Edward SICK, tib -'Qee, &e. Ts is one prevaiin- Inlftnce of the Thesrical Cullom, as I above hinted, of flonrifing Tr, tis i:n ail-nd e i B't aertoiny this Cfutonm is molt ahfurdly maintain'd in this Place. The Kin is here bronghtu inJc nay, and to such a Degree, that upon his very Entrance, cc--~ ~t s'tr e-venr' dov o be reledfed from Life. Can Trumpets be proper under this re u...e....c To^eS'a"g - a'5;. . j;,s Ruics fro the World, and 'tis known, when- .;:r ;--::: , . lics.:: Crr i- Cr.; ;;er:r, ri a-dl lo;itn.,.. .o-n. o~,- ;W! 0~. 0i. Czarrs C.!st. C rKtirotta, moo Sm usr of z,.ceMStn.
ever a Kinu is lick, all Martial Sounds are forbid at Court, and even the Guard arc reliev'd without Beat of Drum. XXXIX. The Editor (who tells us, that in the oldelt Folio Edition, where the Ars and Diviiion of w. Scenes are sirs diftinguilh'd, they were divided according as they play'd them, often where Aet mif.ilkc. there was no Pause in the Ation, or where they thought fit to makeaBreach in it) has some- times taken Care to regulate the Shtufflirgs and 7ra.fpofitions of the Scenes, and relify the injudicious Divilions of the All: But this Part of Criticifnl does not display irfelf thro' the whole Work. I flall rubjoin one Pafiage, for Example, in which he flems to have em- ploy'd none of this Skill in marking the Division of an All, viz. the End of the Second A'l of King JoHN, Page I4f. 'Tis true, he errs here in following the old Copies; as he did, in the lall Instance but one, by contraditing them. The Lady CoiiJlcnrc, her Son Ar- thrr, and Lord Salisbury, are upon the Scene; Cofolance bids Salisbuory be gone, and leave her to her Woes: He tellsher, he mult not go without her to the two Kings of England and France. She absolutely refuses to go with him; fays, her Sorrow flall keep its State, and the Kings may come to it. Her concluding Lines are these;,---.---- For my Grief's so great, That no Supporter, but the huge firm Earth, Can hold it up. Here -- I anid orrow fit; Here -- is ry 'hrone; bid Kings rome bow to it. It is evident, I think, beyond Contradifion, that Conflantia here, in her Despair, feats her self upon the Floor of the Stage: And can the be supposed immediately to rife again, on- ly to go off and end the A& decently ? And if file does not, how can the Ac end here? There is but one other Method for it; and that is, of the foremoltfliat-fcene Ihutting her in from the Sight of the Audience, an Absurdity never once pralifed by SHAKESPEARE. In the very next Scene which follows, and fiands as thefirfl Scene of the third Ac, the Kings are introduc'd,.and Conflantia is likewise upon the Stage, and speaks within eight Lines of the Scene's beginning. We must therefore either suppose an Unity of the two Scenes, and that They come in to her so soon as hie fits down on the Floor; or rather, (which I think has been an Opinion of long Standing,) that an intermediate Scene or two have been loft, whereby we cannot now be certain how the A& ended; and that an Hiatus in Iinrfcripto ought to be mark'd to signify the Imperfeaion. XL. The faulty Passages which I have hitherto alledged, I think, are moRly such, as cal led for the AffilRance of JRdgmsent to let them right: There are other Places again, which are Fts orl I7; corrupted in our Author, that are to be cur'd by a firic Attention to the Author hilmfelf, rt and by taking Hil/ory along with us, wherever his Subjec is hiflorical. Diligence in this RefpeC& is certainly the Duty of an Editor: And yet that a due Care, even in this Part, has been hitherto wanting, the Inltances I am now going to subjoin will manifeltly prove. MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM, Page 9S.,Didft 71ou not lead him thro' the glrmm'riig Night From PEREGENIA, whom he ravisied? Mr. POPE confesses in his Preface, * that No one is more a Mafler of the Poetical Stors, Gr has more frequent Allusions to the variours Parts of it than SHAKESPEARE. It mudl be osn'd * p.ge a. and the Pafage before us is a signal Inflance. He touches upon a minute Circufltlaice in the Story of Thefens; but, indeed, None of the old Clafficks tell us of such a Person as Peregema, with whom that Hero had an Affair: Rellore therefore the Place, from the Au- thority of the Greek Writers.,Dilf thou not lead him thro' the glimmm'ring Night From PERIGUNE, whom he ravijhed?,Here
Here we have the Name of a famous Lady, by whom Thefejas had his Son Melanippr. She was the Daughter of Si;:rl, the cruel Robber, and Tormentor of Paffelgers in the le:bu:l; and PLUTARCH and ATrHEs.N S are Both express in the Circumaance of TheJtuo's ras ing her, which s so exactly copied by our Poet. The former of Them adds, (as Diodo- rus Sls, 4;lid;r:s, and Pa:f:;i.u, likewise tell us,) that he kill'd her Father into the Bargain. .'e L:ie. XLI. K. Joas, Page 139.,Fr ANGGIERS, .xd fair Touraine, Maine, Poiftiers, Aad all sthat e pe this. Side the Sea, Except this City rnTw by os befieg'd, Sird iale, &c. Here we have an lInfance of the like Carelefnefs in a Point of Englil History. King j..; confen:ing to match the Lady Blrarb with the Daupbin, agrees, in Part of her Dowry, to gire up all he held in Frai:ce, except the City of Angiers, which he now bfcieg'd, and laid C!ami to. How ran ir be thought then, that he Ihould at one and the fame Time give up all cicea: agr,-rs, and give up Tp s too? The Error is transmitted from the old Copies, and mr. a -i corected thus;,Far ANJOU, andrfi.r Tonraine, &c. This s w one of the Provinces, as Mr. Pope might have remember'd, which the Englih ikld in Fr::t, and which the Fre,,ch King by Chatilion claim'd of K. John in Right of Duke drJer, at the vcry opening of the Play, Page 116.,----- 'P.:ers, ANJOU, Toarrai7e, Mlaine. o:--i -L E- at Ar.irs instead of Arejs, has been printed in more Places than That already quoted; '--_... and some orther Errors been tranimitted down to boot. See Page t129.,Auf. King LEWIS, de:ermine what we /ball do freight. LEWIS. If'ze:r. ed Fo.ls, brckf off yor Coaufrente.,Ki.g John, ti .;s the ver Sum of All: *. Ergland ae; Ireland, ANGIERS, Touraine, Maine,,Il rri-t ss Ar.hur do I claim of shee: I!h Th-:: resign :them, c:ad 1y drwn t', Ari rs K. John. i), L:.-, as sris. I di defy thee, FRANCE. Here ang, ininzed of Angiers, we muf reltore ANJOU. But who is it makes this C!aim cpon the E;fgEL- King? 'Tis plain, both from the Verse quoted of the Duke of Ajiir: s Speech, and crom the other of K. John's, that the King of France was the Deman- canr. Btt h.e King of Fra.rce's Name was not Lieis. In both Lines therefore where Le:--is pr-ted, it muff be retlor'd PHILIP. Tie L-e. XLiL. WVill. L:;dr -bat Captain ere yout?,K. Hen. Under Sir JOHN Erpingham. WiTl. A gad old Commandrer, &c. Here ain Hillory and our Poet's Text are made to disagree; nor was there any such Gen- r.enan as Sir JES ErpiEgl.r in Being in K. Henry Vth's Reign: Refiore it, as it ought to be;,Will. ULrder w- I- Cs.tain: eree y..er E. Hn. L:xcr ':r THOMAS Erpingham, E&c.,This
This is one of the Charaaers introduc'd in the Play; and he entring but three Pages before, the King salutes him thus;,Good Morrow, old Sir THOMAS Erpingham: Agoodfoft Pillow for thatgood white Head Were better than a chirlijh Turf of France. That this was his Name, we have the Authority of our Chronicles; and They, and our Poet from them, in his Richard II. Page 1l2, tell us, that Sir Thomas Erpinghasm was One of those who embark'd from Bretagne to espouse the Interest of Bolingbroke the Father of K. Henry V. XLIII. Ibid. Page 47f. zhe Like. Alarum. Enter K. Henry and BOURBON with Prifiners, Lords, &c. This is likewise an Error transmitted from the Old to the Modern Editions; Bourbon was one of the French Party, and therefore could not make a Part of K. Henry's Train. Re- ftose it;,Alarm. Enter K. Henry, ana GLOUCESTER, with Prisoners, &c. But may it not be said, that Bourboni is brought in here amongst the French Prisoners ? To This, I reply, that our Poet would hardly have introduc'd a Characer of that Dignity, crowd- ed him amongst the common Prisoners, and neither made him speak to the King, nor the King to him. Besides, I have another Exception yet ftrongcr to add, why Bourbon cannot be supposed to enter here: In a few Pages after, (viz. Page 481.) the King asks the Duke of Exeter (who enter'd with him, and had been all along in the Presence) what Prisoners of Rank were taken, and Exeter replies;,Charles 2)ke of Orleans, Nephew to the King; John Duoke of BOURBON, and Lord Bouchiquald. I submit it therefore to the most common judgments, whether 'tis probable, if Bourbon was among the Prisoners introduc'd in the King's Train, that the Duke of Exeter could have been guilty of such an Absurdity, to tell the King that Bmrrbon was taken Prisoner. XLIV. Firfi Part of K. HENRY VI. Page 17. i ,e Like. Winch. How now, ambitious UMPIRE, what means 'his. These Words are spoken by the Bishop of Winchefler to the Duke of Gloucefjer, who is forcing his Way into the Tower to survey it. But why, Umpire? or, of what? Glounefler was ProteCtor of the Realm in the King's Minority; but not an Umpire in any particular Matter that We know of. I am persuaded the Duke's Christian Name lurks under this Corruption, and the very Traces of the Letters convince me that our Poet wrote, as it ought certainly to be ieflor'd.,Winch. How now, amrbitios HUMPHREY, what means This? XLV. Serond Part of K. HENRY VI. Page 17. he Like.,Sim. God knows of pure Devotion, being cal'd,A hundred Times, and offter, in my Sleep, Bygood St. Alban; who said, SIMON, come, Come, offer at my Shrine, and I will help thee.,Z '. The
The Editions here aein are at Odds with the Hiflory. Why, Simon? The Chronicles, that t'ke No!ice of the Duke of Glb:ceflir's detecing this pretended Miracle, tell us, that the Impofor, who asserted Himfeli to be cur'd of Blindness, was call'd Saunder Simpcox. -- S.iisi is therefore a Corrunpion, thro' the Negligence of the Copyiils; and we mull restore,------- H fai, SIMPCOX, come, Comr, offer a: i; Srine, a;.: I will help thee. Ear we hve no heed of going back to Chroikles to fettle this Point, fnce onr Poet, in the very next Page, gives us the Fellow's Names, which correspond with the Hiltory.,G!ouc. IWhbfs tsrtne osa Narc ? Se.i. Sannder Simpcox, an' if it pleajcyoa, infler. Glonc. Sannder, fr: iltre, &c. l: LII. XLVI. Ibii. Page 132.,The Sift -ws EDWARD Langley, )uke: of York. H-vrig an Eye to Hitlory, as I hinted before, would easily have difcover'd an Error in the Copies here, and that the Pafage ought to be reltor'd;,fIe F.f:b ;vs EDMOND Langley, ;ukef of York. 'Fre Poet is here enumerating the liTue Male of K. Edwarv III. and the whole Tenour of HiloUy is express, that his fifrh Son was Edmord of Langloy, and created Duke of York. _-e Tz.. XL-VII. I1,.i. Page IjYS,MIarg. God fsrb .-, ay r.-le /:s:ld previl,,Th= fazl:l'e rl my cnkdsm a Noblerman: 'PrOy GoJ, ke mry a: .i hbim of S;.fp'iion. K. Hen. 1 thaik tie, NELL, t:fe WCords content me much. I r:emnmer, our Poet, in his King JO-te, makes kFlconbridge the BaRtard, upon his firll ftep- pi::t into Honour, fay, that he will iludy to forget his old Acquaintance;,Ar.d f bs Naie be George, rll call im Seter; F:r :ew-miid Hs:eitr do:h forget .lens Names. Brt, fire!y, this is wide of K. HENsa's Cafe, and it can be no Reason why he Ihould forget his own Wife's Name, and call her ANell inflead of illargaret. Perhaps, it may be alledg'd, th-r thr-lunder was Original in the Poet; that his Head was full of another Character, which he introduces in this Play, Elerj;r Dutchess of Glonefler, whom her Husband frequently alis NTll: and thence thnr' Inadvertence he might flip into this Milake. Were this to be alov'd the Cafe, is not the Mistake therefore to be recified As the Change of a lingle Latter sets all right, there's very little Reason to accuse our Poet of such an Inadvertense: 1 a much more willing to suppose it came from his Pen thus;,K. Hen. I :rak :ee. -- WELL; tbef Words conte me much. E. Herry was a Prince of great Piety and Meekness, a great Lover of his Uncle Gloccftler, whom his Nobles were rigidly persecuting, and to whom he fufpe&ed the Queen bore no vesr good Will in her Hert: But finding her, beyond his Hopes, speak so candidly in the Duke's Cafe, he is mightily comforted, and contented at her impartial Seeming. I believe, Every body in their Converflrion mutl have obferv'd, that the Word, Well, -- is used to ex- e-tian Air of Sitise-;cion, when any Incident in Life goes to our Wilh; or any Purpose, trat was dreaded, happens to be disappointed.,XLVIII.
XLVIII. K. RICHARD III. Page 432. nhe Li,.,And who doth lead them but a paltry Fellow, Long kept in Britaine at OUR Mother's Coj/i This is spoken by Richard III. of Henry Earl of Richmond; but They were far from having any common Mother, but England; and the Earl of Richmond was not fubfifled abroad at the Nation's publick Charge. He fled with the Earl of Pembroke into Betagny in K. Edward IVth's Reign: And many Artifices were tried both by That King firh and K. Richard afterwards, to get him deliver'd up by the French King, and Duke of Breta.avn But he happily efcap'd all the Snares laid for him. hBut during the greatell Part of his R1e idence abroad, he was watch'd and rellraiu'd almost like a Captive, and fsubied by Supplies convey'd from the Countess Dowager of Richmond, his Mother: Reflore therefore the Poet thus;,And who doth lead them but a paltry Fellow, Long kept in Bretagne at HIS Iother's Cofi? XLIX. K. HENRY VIII. Page 448. The Lik.,- .----- Here is a Warrant from The King t'attach Lord Montague, and the Bodies Of the Duke's Confefor, John de la Car, ONE Gilbert Peck, his COUNSELLOR. Besides a flight Corruption in the Beginning of the last Line, which makes the Conneaion faulty, this affage labours with another Error, which the Editor might have amended either from having an Eye to the real Hi.tory, or to the Words of the Poet afterwards: Corte.,At wbhrch assear'd aga'msi- him his Sorveyor the Whole thus;,Here is a Warrant from The King t'attach Lord Montague, and the Bodies Of the Duke's Confefor, John de la Car, AND Gilbert Peck, his CHANCELLOR. Sir Gilbert Peck, (or Perk, as it is in fume Copies,) the Chronicles tell us, was Chancellor to the Duke of Buckingham; and so we afterwards find him flyled by our Author in the Play before us, Page 466.,At which appear'd againji him his Surveyor, Sir Gilbert Peck his CHANCELLOR, and John Car, Confejfor to him, with that Devil-Mlonk Hopkins, that made this Alifchief, The Mention of this Monk naturally calls upon me to correct a Pfange or two, in which all the Copies have hitherto been faulty, with Regard to his Name. See Page 449. Emenatior,Buck. ---------- o, J,,lThfe are the Limbs o'th' ~Plot: No more, I hope. Brand. A Monk o'th' Chartreux. Buck. --- ......- MICHAEL Hopkins? Brand. He.,~Z~~ 2 c~Here
Hi-e-igia.i from the Cnc::rrence our o Hitorians, we are warranted to correct the Poet;,Ersn. A ls-k o':b' Charrreux. --- Bac' . ------ NICHOLAS Hopkins? E-P .; tr .ill we then do with another Paffge, where the Duke's Surveyor is under his E -n.in:ion before the King and Council ? P. 455. S .rr. --------- He was brougbh to This,B a rzs T 3Probefie of Nicholas HENTON. King. Ifr: was a .- HENTON? San-. ----- Sir, a Chartreux Fryar, &c. e; o.r-.r- 'Tis eviden:, Brard;n and the Surveyor are in two Stories, as the Poet's Text now Rands; Eza o:c. but. I am persuaded, it is corrupt: For in Sac there was but One Monk concern'd with,,or Evidence again the Duke; and his Name was Nicholas Hopkins. Our Poet therefore rnIu be refor'd;,By a an 'PrSrphecy cf Nicholas HOPKINS. King. ido wa-s That HOPKINS? EBt how came He:-ts. to find a Place at all in the Text? It will be no great Difficulty to account for This, when we come to confider, that Hopkins was a Monk of the Convent ca!l'd Hsser:i near Br.y7ol; and might, according to the Cultom of those Times, be call'd as well :sh :si of Henr:y: by Some of the Hilorians from the Place, as Hopkins, by Others, from his Family. And This, as I take it, is sufficient Ground for the Mistake from the Ha=ds of a negligent Transcribe. ,-- L,-I. rL. I r.ail add but one more Error at present (but It ihall be a signal One) tranfinitted by,the EDrrOR thro' I li;g::-re, and a Want of dse Appliscaios to the Meaning of the Author aid the Sense of the Pafage. MhIrc- Aro Ao30-T NOTsSc, Page So3. Borach. Go ;enfin d rec a mnec Hoar to dra on Pedro, and the Count Claudio, alone;,:tel them tbx s u kno Hero oves ME; ------ Offer thenm Inflantes which JiaS bear n;o /si' Likel)hood tha to fee Me at her Chamber WinUdw, hear mne ca!l Margaret, Hero; bear MIargaret term me CLAUDIO; and bring them tfc.r-' r:h tthe nry Ngh; before the intended Wfedding. I am obliged to give here a fr.ort Account of the Plot depending, that the Emendation, which I am about to make, may appear the more clear and unquestionable. The Business flands thus: Clas:!a, a Favourite of the Arragon Prince, is, by his Intercessions with her Father, to be married to the fhir Hero; Do: Jobn, a natural Brother of the Prince, and a Hater of Clas o3, is in his Spleen zealous to disappoint the Match. Borachio, a rascally Dependant on Don: Jobt, offers his Aifitance, and engages to break off the Marriage by this Stratagem. ' Tell the Prince and Cla:'.i (Jiss He) that Hero is in Love with Mie, they won't believe ' ir; ofer them Proofs, as that riey shall fee me converse with her in her Chamber Win- "cow: I am in the good Graces of her Wairing-Wuman Alargaret; and I'll prevail with ' i ALrare: at a dead Hour of Night, to personate her Aillrefs Hero ; do you then bring ' the Prince and Cl:iL to o er-hear our Discourse, and they fball have the Torment to " hrr ,e address lLrgaret by the Name of Hero, and her fay sweet Things to me by the Name of ClaEss." ---- This is the Subilance of Borachio's Device to make Hero sus- ercaed of Disloyalty, and to break off her Match with Cla4dio. But, in the Name of Gooniefs, could it difple-fe Cl:ud: to hear his Miiftres making Use of hi Name tenderly ? I he aw another hMan with her, and heard her call him Claudio, he might reasonably think her rrra-y'd, but not have the fame Reason to accuse her of Disloyalty. Besides, how could hr nanmi g Cl;as:o, make the Prince and Caudio. believe that she lov'd Borachio, as He de- ires Dxon ojn to insinuate to them that She did. The Circumflances confider'd, I have no D:ou; but the Passage ought to he corre&ed thus; Borach.
Borach. Go /thet, find me a eecct HIout to draw oUi Pedro, and the Co:lit Claudio, alone;,tell them that you k;tow Hero lov'i ME; ------ Offer them Ir.tanrces which pJall bear no less Likelihodi than to fee e eat her Chamber-bWiidow; hear Me call Margaret, Hero; heir Margaret termr me BORA.CHIO; and bring them to fee this the very Night efore the intended Uedding. LI. But it is high Time now that I turn my Pen to one promised Part of my Task, E.icSDATIose which is yet in Arrears, viz. an Endeavour to restore Senlf to PafTages, in which, thiro' the Corruption of successive Editions, no Sense has hitherto been found: Or to rellore, to the belt of my Power, the Poet's true Text, where I lufpec it to be millaken thro' the Error of the Press or the Mannsfcripts. The utmoRl Liberty that I flall take in this Attempt, ihall ge- nerally confine it felt to the minute Alteration of a single Letter or two: An Indulgence which, I hope, I cannot fear being granted me, if It retrieves Sense to such Places as have either escaped Observation, or never been disputed or underRfood by their Editors. I'll dif- patch this remaining Part of my Appendix with all the Brevity that the Nature of the EsE.s- DATIONS will admit; as Such, they are humbly propos'd: But wherever better Judges are pleased to think that Word too peremptory, I am very well content to soften it into CON- JECTURES. As the hAERCHANT of VENIcE happens to furnilh three or four remarkable Ones, they mhall fland the foremolt in this Lift. MERCHANT of VENICE, Page 1a.,Ncr. Firi?, there is the Neapolitan Prince. Port. Ay, that's a COLT indeed, for he doth Nothing blut talk of his hose, and he,makes it a great Appropriation to his own good _Parts that he can (hoo hiin himself: I am much afraid my Lady his Mother play'd false with a Smith. Portia here discoursing with her Waiting-Woman about her Suitors, Arerija runs over the Catalogue of them, with Design to found the Affedtions of her Lady. But how does talk- ing of Horses, or knowing how to shoe them, make a Man e'er the more a Colt? Or why, if a Smith and a Lady of Figure were to have an Affair together, should a Colt be the Issue of that Conjuntion? I make no Doubt but this is simply Portia's Meaning: Wlhat do you tell me of the Neapolitan CPrince? he is fitch a fJlupid l2fnce, that injfead of Jafying fine Things to me, he does Nothing but talk of his Horses. ---- Now; This is some Reason for sus- pe ing that his Mother fliould have play'd false with a Saith: People generally talk molt in their own Profeflions, or in Those of their Family; and Farriers, I presume, will be al- lowed to talk more of Horfemanlhipthan any other Subject. I do not question therefore to reflore it;,Port. Ay, That's a DOLT indeed; for he doth Nothing but talk of his Horse, and,he makes it a great Appropriation to his own good Parti, that he can Ihoe him himself, &c. A fDol: is properly one of the moltl tupid and blockilh of the Vulgar; and in this Significa- tion it is used by our Author himself. See his Anthony and Cleopatra, Page 398.,Follow his Chariot, like the greatefl Spot Of all thy Sex; mo/l monfler-like, e jbewn For poor'jt Diminutioes, for DOLTS --- i. e. become the Gaze of the molf vile Plebeians, the mol fordid ignorant Rabble. And so, again, in OTHELLO, Page S83.,--...... Oh, Gull! Oh, DOLT! As ignorant as Dirt; Lll, Ibid. Page a4.,.VVhat a Beard haft thou got! Thou haft got more Hair on thy Ch.:l, than EsiMEDATIOi. Dobbin my PHIL-borfe has on bis Tailr.,I
1 f-.ood have pass'd this over as a Literal Error, occafion'd by the Oversight of the Editor bu that I find' i is copied from the old Editions: And yet even there originally it is but a ::r! Error. It munf be relor'd;,------ 7':-- *:.-;i gc ir.cre Hair on thy Chin, than Dobbin ry THILL- csj bs ij hi :s T.ail A Ti, 1 as it is very well knowr, is the Beam or Draught-Tree of a Cart or Waggon; and the 7T-.i,-Horfe. cor.feaentlv. is that Horse which is put under the hill. SKINNER, indeed, mentions the j--H-irfe, i'. e. the 13as Horse in the fJile; bur he confelfes it, a Term, which he desv.ed rrom th: Informationof a learn-d Clergyman. sue r:=.;ru::. LII. Ib:d. Page at. 'Isro b:ls, a black Prince, among the reft of 5Portia's Suitors,rptting in his Prcrenions, and preparing to decide his Fate by the Choice of the Casket, rce-ass uvon the Conditions to which he is fubjeced: That he, who had slain a Sopby with his Scmitar, won three Battles of a Sultan, who could outstare and outbrave the terneft aad moit daring Cretures rpon Earth, pluck the Cubs from a She-Bear, and mock the roar- ing of a hungry Lion, m:;t be bassed and worfded in this Adventure by the Caprice of b:nd Fortune.,------. But, aL:s the while! if Hercules ar. LYCHAS play at ice ir.:cb s the bekter mai, the greater tbrow aiIy tar2n b' fcsrr:..e from tbe weaker baad: Ss is Aliddes betrs: by hi RAGE, Ar.dl mafy I, blird fortune leading me, 11fs ti t -which sre i.worthier may attain, Ar:d de wi;:b grie'.g. Tho' the whole Set of Editions concur in this Reading, and it has pass'd wholly unfurpea- ed by the Learned Editor, I am very well affur'd, and I dare fay the Readers will be so too non. tht it is corrupt at Bottom. Let us look into the Poet's Sentiment, and the Hiflory' of the Persons ererecnted. If Hercules (fays he) and Licbas (for so is his Name to be relt, if we may take Spscles, Oi.-d, &c. for our Guides) were to play at Dice for the Decision cf their Superiority; Lisckr , the weaker Man, might have the better Carl of the Two. But how then is A,'i:des beaten by his Rage ? To admit This, we mult suppose a Gap in -th Poet; and that some Lines are loft in whiich l:recles, in his Passion for losing the Hand, had thrown the Box and Dice away, and knock'd his own Head against the Wall for meer Madnef. Thus, indeed, might he be said, in feme Sense, to be beaten by his Rage. But SE..3Esp AtRE had no such Stuff in his Head. He means no more than, if Lirbs had t;- b'eter Throw, so might Hercrles himself be beaten by Lichas. In short, Lichas was tho poor unfortunate Servant of Here:ses, who, unknowingly brought his Mafler the envc- nom'd Shirt. dipp'd in the Bloctd of the Centaur Aei.ies, and was thrown headlong into the Se for his Pains. The Poet has alluded to some Parts of this Fable in another of his Plays; and there indeed a reasonable Intimation is made of Hercules worsting himself thro' his own Rage. Sec Ar.:bty and Cl/rpatra, Page 398.,Anth. -------------- Eros, boa,,ITe Sh.rt of Neffss :sp so Me; -- tetch me, A!cides, thsn mr.re Acofijr, tly Rage: Lc: .e lgge Lichas on the Herns o'th' M'oon, Atrd, - ait thoi hErdls tatgrafp'd the heaviest Cltb, St:kds:r ;:3 ywrt-eji Self. -c r-n to the Place before Us: Can we defre more than to know this one Circum- ;ince of Licr-s's QaaLitv to set us right in the Poet's Meaning, and put an End to all the pr:fent Abfardirv of the Passage? Retfore it, without the least Scruple, only with cutting off tire Tail of a single Leter; Bt
..-.---.-- But, alas, the while! Should Hercules and Lichas play at 5ice lYhich is the better Mlan, thegreater Throw May turn by Fortune from the weaker Hand: So is Alcides beaten by his PAGE; Andfo may I, blind Fortune leading me, AMi?7 'fat which an Unworthier may artair; And die with grieving. It is scarce requilite to hint here, it is a Point so well known, that Page has been always used in Engll/h to signify any Boy-Servant; as well as what latter Times have appropriated the Word to, a Lady's Train-Bearer. And so Faljfaffe's Boy, in our Poet, is frequently cal- led his Page. So much in Explanation of this new-adopted Reading. The very excellent Lord LANSDOWNE, in his Alteration of this Play, tho' he might not sand to make the Cor- retion upon the Poet, seems at least to have underflood the Paflage exaaly as 1 do: And tho' he changes the Verse, retains the Sense of it in this Manner;,So were a Giant worfled by a Dwarf! Tho' I had made the Emendation, before I thought to look into his Lord/lip's Performance, it is no small Satisfaction to me, that I have the Authority of such a Genius to back my Con- jedture. LIV. Ibid. Page 7I. EESDAxsn :,Port. Is he not able to difharge the money ? Bass Tes, here I tender it for him in the Court,,Tea, twice the Sum; if that will notj ffire, I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er, Onforfeit of my hands, my head, my heart. If this will not ffirce, it mufi appear That malice bears down TRUTH. ---- This is a Passage which has ever pass'd unfufpreed, and yet, I dare fay, does not yield us the Poet's Text. The Cafe is this; Shylock, a Jew, lends Anthonio, a Venetian Merchant, 30oo Ducats on Bond, with Condition, that if he did not pay them at aDay certain, the Jew might claim the Forfeiture of a Pound of A4thonio's Flelh to be cut from the Parts nearest to his Heart. The Bond becomes forfeited; and the Jew rigidly insists upon the fpecifick Penalty, and will accept no Sum whatever to remit that. But how does MlIalice bear down Truth in this Process? Or what one Circumflance is there in the Cause, whereby Truth or FalI/ood can come linto the Queflion ? I cannot suppose that by Truth the Poet means Jlflice, an the Equity of the Thing; if That had been his Thought, there is a Monosyllable To much more proper and intelligible at hand to answer that Senfc, that he would unqueltionably have laid That Malice bears down Right. - --- But I am perluaded that SIAKESPEARE intended BaOfanio should intimate, if the Jew would come to no Terms, nor take his Debt though tender'd with such large Advantage, it was plain, he was so blood-thirfly that his Malice had got the better of his Passion of Interest, and extinguilh'd all Sentiments of Remorse, Tender- »efj, and human Charity. The Stress of the Affair lies betwixt the Jew's Malice, and the Interceflions of the Court to him to be merciful. This is the Trenour of the whole Scene; and consonant to this Meaning, the a'Dke addresses himself to Shyloek, so soon as he appears at the Bar, in there Words; Page 64.,Shylock,
Shylock:, :e iorl d. thb.:;;, and I tbhikfi to, 7Tha. :s:3 b: : I.zj'fi this FaJbiso of thy Malice To t:e 1sj H;ur ,f AS, and then 'ti. ths;ght Tb5:'l: j/ hewC :t Mercy and Remorse moare firange Tea is tb' fir.nge appare7:: Cruelty. The Duke's Speech is directly a Persuasive to Coipaflioa, and this Topick is so often reinfor. ced in fevera1 Pailsges of the Scene, that I make not the lealt Qucelion but our Poet made his Berf'ni fay, the Jew not complying to accept such an extravagant Return for his Debt,,If Tis will rnf s:f.re, i: mufj appear Thra Malice tears dswn RUTH. -- *. e. IerI, and Comps-fis. So this Word is explain'd by the Etymologists; and so it is used both by CH.s-cER and SPESSER, SEAXESPEARE'S two Great Originals in Language. I coald quote Initaces almo f without Number, where our Poet uses ruthftit and ruthlefr: Nor was the Subftanrive it feli so obsolete, or uncommon, but that he has frequently chose to employ it. K. RiCnA.-nD II. Page I 4-,Here di Sbe drap a Tear, here in this 'P.ace rll/ f a Bank of Rue, fw'r Herb of Grace: Rue, ev' fsrRUTH, bere bortly iball be fen, In the Recmiem-ranse of a weeping Queen. So TROILVS and CRESSIDA, Page 1C9.,Let's lesave r: crn.it Pity with s:rr mIotbhrs; Anrd w-en we hazb ozor Ariours buckled on, T.he vsr.m'd Vengeance ri:e aupon rnr Swords, Sour ticm to rueful [Iork, rein them from RUTH. And so, CORIOLA\USs, Page 97.,Is-old terl Nbitby I aftde their RUTH. Ard le: me ,f: re Sswrd, &c. - ,r LV. Id. Page 6S.,Biff. Whry dlfi ti:- -= 'h tb' knifbe si earcnefly2 Shy!. 'o z the: fsrf:eitfrom tas bankrupt there. Grat. X-. or :by SOUL! b:a on thy SOUL, barjh e-w,,Tr-;g mr.'.~i )y kh.y e keen; --- T don't know what Ideas the Editor had afix'd to himself of the Poet's Sense here; for my own Pat ti can find iNone as the Texr ftinds now. I dare venture to relltore Him, from the Authority of some of the Fslio Editions; the' i am obliged at the fame Time to reflore such a Sore of Conceit, and Jiol7e upon two Words, alike in Sound but differing in Sense, as our Author ought to have bluth'd for. But be That upon his own Head. If I retore his singa d l his Words, he himfeli is accountable to the Judges for writing them.,Balff
Bass. WWhy dofi thou whet thy Knifefo earejflly2 Shyl. To cut the Forfeit from That Bankrupt there. Grat. Not on thy SOLE, but on thy SOUL, harpi yew,,Thou mnak't thy Knife keen; --- i. e. Tho' thou thinker that thou art whetting thy Knife on the Sole of thy Shoe, 'et it is upon thy Soul, thy immortal Part, that Thou doeft it, miltalen, inexorable Man ! The bare Intention of thy Cruelty is so unpardonable, that it must bring thy very Soul into Hazard. I dare affirm, This is the very mntithefis of our Author; and I am the more confident, be- cause it was so usual with him to play on Words in this manner; and because in another of his Plays lie puts the very fame Words in Opposition to one another, and That from the Mouth of one of his serious Charahers. See RoMEO and JULIET, Page zy9, 60.,Mere. Nay, gentle Romeo, we mufl have you dance. Rom. Not 1, believe me; Tou have dancing Shoes,With nimble SOLES, I havo a SOUL of Lead, That flakes me to the Ground, I cannot move. He is at it again within three Lines after, upon two other Words agreeing in Sound; as we find the Paflage in the second Folio, and several other Editions, tho' Mr. POPE has not inserted it.,I am too SORE eupierced with his Shaft, To SOARE with his light Feathers. --- But, as I said, these Jingles are perpetual with Him. LVI. LovE's LABOUR LOST, Page 133. E.MENDAION;,Long. Ifear, theeffiubborn lines lackpow'r to move;,0 sweet Maria, Empress of my love! These Numbers will I tear, and write in Prose. Bir. Oh, Rhimes are guards on wanton Cupid's bose:,Disfigure not his SHOP. -- This is one of those Passages, which, I am very willing to suppose, never pass'd Mr. POPE'S Revisal. What Agreement in Sense is there betwixt CUPID's Hose and his Shop . Or what Relation can those two Terms have to one Another? Or, what is Cupid's Shop1 All the Editions happen to concur in the Error; but That ought not to hinder us from correcing it;,Oh! Rhymes are Guards on wanton Cupid's Hoe; Disfigure not his SLOP. *- lopt.lare, as SXINNER and others rightly inform us, large and wide-kneed Breeches, now on- ly worn by Ruflicks and Sea-faring Men: And we have at this Day Dealers, whose sole Business it is to furnilh the Sailors with Shirts, Jackets &c. who are call'd Slop-len; and their Shops, Slop-Shops: SHAKESPEARE knew the Term, and has made Use of it in more than one Place; Second Part of K. HENRY IV. Page 299.,Zhalt laid AMr. Dombledon about the Sattin for my /bort Cloak and SLOPS?,Aa So
So in ROMEo and J!-LiEr, Page *zS.,Si,;i:;r Romeo, bon onr; --- tere's a French Sal.!ation to your French SLOP. 'Tis true, Mr. PoPE has r inted it here -- y- - r French STOP. But it mull be corrcred as I have reflored it from tne second Folio Edition, and the other better Copies, or We come an no Seaue. Thole wide-kneed Breeches were the Garb in fashion in our Author's Days, (as we Lma observe from old Family-Pi&ures,) as well off, as upon the Stage: And tIhn they we thethe Mode in Fr.ire too, is plainly hinted in another of our A/uthor's Plays. See K. HES'Y V. Page 4S.,Dauph. Ob, tr-e. elk Jt e 'was old andi genle, and you rode like a Kerne of Ireland,,)Car French HOSE off, agd i )yo:r fireight Stroffers. HIe and Slsps were synonymous Terms, and used to signify the felt-fame Accoutrement. I'll throw in one lIftance more of our Author's being acquainted with the Word Slops, because the Pas-Age is not to be found in the common Editions; but I'll restore it from an o:d One in Qzarto, (pabliih'd for An:rre-w I.fr and Wlliam Afplei in i6o0) an Edition a.hich Mr. POE never saw, or at leat never collated MIcca ADo A-our NOTHING, Page 516.,2Tere is no Appefrasice of Fancy i; him, rtlefI it be a Fancy that he hath,to firar.ge D~ignifrs, as to be a Dutchman to day, a Frenchman to mor- row; or in the fnape of two Countries at once, as a German from the Wafle downward, all SLOPS; and a Spaniard from the Hip upward, no Doublet, &c. 'ES-D--,-,ox: LVII. MsIERY WtIES of WIDnsoR, Page z44.,Falf. Sr.meeimes tie Beni of her Eye GUIDED my Foot, oimetimes mry portly,BSelly. Fae : ffe is here talking how Mrs. Page look'd upon him, and furvey'd him all over, and exa- .i'd his Parrs with very good Liking. But how did her Eyergude his Foot? &c. Cer- .Ianl', this can never mean, gided itse7f towards his Foot. Faljiffe seems to me here to fpeas as a Man in Love, with much Complaisance; aon as comparing his Milfrefs's Eye to the Sun so Brightness, and for a Power of brightening the Obje& which it darted on: I the:efore qudefon not bur it sionld be corrected thus;,Smrreti;es te Bea;i of her Eye GUILDED my Foot, foinetisres my portly I: is a poetical Expreflon to fay that her Eye, like the Sun,gilded Cor, guilded, as of old they wrote it) what Part it shone upon; and 1 am the rather persuaded that my Correcion is .ri't, from the immediate Reply of Pifol, which keeps up the Ietaphor;,Thn did the SUN on Durngill shine. E.'rdO. LVIII. IGid. Page 31.,ilrs. Ford. Mrs. Page is ccse w;itb me, Sweet-heart. Falf. n;.ide re m like a BRIB'D buck, each a hansnch. I -.?r cc.qcf, I don't undertand the Meaning of a brib'd Btck: If I conceive the Author's ,Se '-: ail, : o-.&t to be rctLor'd; Did,Divide-
Divide me ike a BRIBE-Buck, each a Haunch. i. e. as a Buck sent for a Bribe betwixt You. So it becomes a Term of Art, and a very proper One; and it brings to my Mind what is recorded in Print concerning my Lord Chief Jriflice HALE; that when he went the Circuit, if any Gentleman, who had a Cause to come before him, sent him Venison, he constantly refused it, faying, -- It is a BRIBE-Buck, and I'll have None of it. LIX. K. LEAR, Page 9. Cordel. -------- Peace be with Burgundy, Eir,Since that Respect AND Fortunes are his Love, I fhl not be his fife. The Duke of Burgundy had made his Addrefles to Cordelia, and was to have her to Wife with a Third Part of her Father's Kingdom in Dowry; but her Father-falling out with, and dilinheriting her, asks Burgundy if he will take her in that Condition, and dowerlefs: Bur- gundy exculing himself, and that he cannot take her without the propos'd Portion, Cordelia thus replies to his Refusal. But what does the Poet mean by Refpefl and Fortmunes What Respect? If Lear would have bestowed the third Part of his Dominions, as he had contrac- ted, that was all the Refpec which Burgundy would have flood upon with her. I would willingly reltore it with my Quarto Edition, publilh'd in 16fS, which 1 presume never came to theEditor's View.,--------- Peace be with Burgundy! Since that Refpecs OF Fortune are hi Love, I jlall not be his l&ife. i. e. since his profelt Love and Addreflcs to Me, were only on Account of the Dowry which he hop'd to have with me. LX. Ibid. Page lo.,Time jall nmfold what PLIGHTED Cunning hides. EMENDATIos There is no good Sense in this Epithet, plighted, here, and therefore there is Reason to iuf- pe& it a Corruption. The Meaning of the Poet certainly is, that Time fliall discover what intricate, perplex'd,involv'd Cunning labours to conceal. Itmuft be reflor'd thereforeeitherthus;,Time lall unfold whats * PLEACHED Cunning hides.,i. e. triJtl, intangled, &c. See MUCDe Ano AOUT NOTHING, Page si i; ANTONY,and CLEOPATRA, P.ge 402 i and HENRr V. Page 489. Or rather,,7itme Jhall unfold what PLAITED Cunning hides. Each of the Terms arifwer the Idea required in this Place; but I prefer the latter, because it signifies wrapt in Folds, and is more directly opposite in Sense to unfolding. The Word might possibly, according to the old Spelling, be wrote thus, plaighted; and so the Mistake arise by an easy Corruption of it into plighted. LXI. Ibid. Page 73. E'!EnDATIO,-----.-- i'orld, world, 0 world! But that thy Jlrange Mnutatios make us HATE tbee, Life would not yield to age. This, I think, is as remarkable a Passage, as has at all fall'n under my Conlideration. It has neither been liupected, nor attempted; tho', 'tis evident, it carries a flat Contradiaion to the Sentiment which the Poet would infer. If the YiclDitutdes in the World make us hate,A a z the
the World, is that a Realon why We fnauld submit to live to be old ? - I Ihould rather have th.o-gt it an Arjgment for the putting an End to a miserable Life. There is so flagrant a Ps-axs in Sense, as the Tert now lunds, that, tho' all the Editions unhappily countenance it. I conceive, Mr. POPE might very safely have indulg'd his private Sense here. I commu- nicated my Objections upon this Place (as I have upon many others) to my late ingenious Friend Dr. SETWL, (whom Death has lince robbed meof, tho' his Merit will long out-live these poor Sheets :) who gave me this Conjecture upon It.,----------- 0 Iorld! WIorl ! WIorld! Bot tbsh tbh jtrJrge Al:tations make ;s BATE thee, Lr-e wsould r. yi:ld it ,ge. --- i. e. ir the many Changes in Life did not induce us to abatefrom, and make Allowances for, Some of the bad Cafnalries, we should never endure to live to old Age. This is excellent good Sense and Reasoning, and certainly comes very near to our Author's Meaning. I have since ventur'd to try my own Strength upon the Passage; and the Dolor wva f complaisant to think my Conjecure less frain d, and the more probable One. I fbfpef, the Poet wrote it thus;,---.------- 0 orld! World! W"orld! Bt h bj r: t froCge Iit:ation make ru WAITE Teee, Lfe wju-.-Id r. : sieldo Age. . e. f the Number of Changes and Vicissitudes, which happen in Life, did not make us ware, and hope for some Turn of Fortune for the better, we could never support the Thought of living to be old, on any other Terms. E-sTas... LXII. Rfir Par - of K. I4-rtvR IV. Page 213.,P. Hen. id'fi t=ie rzeC-r si' Titan kifi a Dijh of butter ? pitifull-hearted TITAN,,thb melrd a tk fweer 2cale of the Sun? if thos did'f, then behold that Com- Tnis absurd Reading poflffes all the Copies that have ever fallen in my Way; and tho' it .as pass'd thro' such a Number of Impreflions, is Nonsense which we may pronounce to have -risen at first from the Inadvertence and Blunder of the Compofjitor to the Press. 'Tis vrell known, .-tasm is one of the poetical Names of the Sun; but we have no Authority from Fable for Than's melting away at his own fwcet Tale, as Narrcifi did at the Reflec- ton of his own sweet Form. The Poet's Meaning was certainly this: Sir Yohn Faljfaffe enters in a great Heat, after having been robb'd by the Prince and Poines in Disguise: And the Prince, feeing him in filch a Sweat, makes the following Simile upon Him: " Do but " look' upon thai Compound of Grease; --- his Fat dripps away with the Violence of his ': Motion, jual as Butter does with the Heat of the Sun-Beams darting full upon it." Cor- rea therefore, as common Sense requires.,P. Hen. D.'ft T"h r..rtr fee Titan Lift a Dl/h of Butter? Pitiful-hearted BUTTER,tht n;m..ted at the frzet Tale of the Sun? --- If thou did'fi, then behold ibta Cewnpormd. cri.rr . LXIIf. Lovso' LUoca LOST, Page 117.,2efe are Cre Ccplsneerts, there are Humonrs, there betray nice Wenches that,wsald ic beray'd .thbout raefe, and make THEM men of Note: do you note Men that rsefl are affeied to these ? The SFeech here is a Description of the odd Altitudes and Affecations which Men in Love safnme. and thereby seduce young Girls into that Pafion. But do these Affelations make Wer ; es Men of Note too? Th is a Ttansfomution, which, I dare fay, the Poet never,thought
thought of. His Meaning is, as I conceive, that they not only inveigle the young Girls, but male the Men taken Notice of, who affect them. Corre& therefore;,----.--.- and make * THE MEN AlMn of Note: Do yot note AIen, that are mofl affected to hefe.,* Or, the Men of Note, This is not the only Paflage of our Author, where, in the printed Copies, I have obferv'd them thro' Error to have ufurp'd the Place of IMen.,C otaflonal COMEDY OF ERRORS, Page 43z. EMODATIO. ;,Ant. Why is Timefich a Niggard of Hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an Excrement? S. Dro. Becaitfe it is a Blefing that he beflows on Beafis; and what he hath franted,THEM in hair, he hath given them in Wit. Ant. W'hy, hbt there's many a Man hath more Hair than lWt. Sure, this is an evident Paradox, and Contradi&ion in Sense. Can Hair be supposed a Blef- ting that Time bellows on Beasts peculiarly, and yet that he hathfcanted them of it too? Cor- reC, as the Context plainly requires;,S. Dro. Becatife it is a Blejing that he beflows on Beasts; and what he hath janted MEN,in Hair, he bath given them in Wit. Ant. Why, bat there's Many a Man bath more Hair than Wit. So there is a Passage in Hamlet, (tho' I have pass'd it over in my Examination of That Play,) where I have always fufpe&ed, on the other hand, that MAen usurps the Place of them. HAMLET, Page 40o. Oeeafio l,Oh, there be Players, that I have seen play, and heard Others prase, and that highly, (not to speak it prophanely,) that neither having the Accent of Chriss tian, 'Pagan, or Alan, have so Irtrtted and bellowed, that I have thought Some of Nature's Journeymen had made MEN, and nmt made them well, they imitated Hmnan;ity o abomniaaly. What? Is Hamlet supposed to reason here, that, because he had seen a few very prepolterous Players, therefore he Should think Nature's Journeymen had made all Alankind? for so Aleu in this Place, without Some or those prefixed, mull imply. No, those Players were so far from appearing human Creatures, that he could scarce imagine them the Handy-Work of Nature, but of Some of her clumsy Journeymen. If This be his Sense, might not the Poet more probably have wrote?,-.---.-------- that I have thought Some of Nature's Journeymen had made T HE M, and not made them well, they imitated Humanity fJ abominably. LXIV. Ibid. Page 173. EENM,An heavy Heart bears NOT an humble ToNgue. From the whole Tenour of this Speech of the Princess, who is fresh in Sorrow on Account of her Father's Death, and who is making Apologies for any Thing that She may have Paid too freely to the King, 'tis plain, this Sentiment is the direa Oppolite to the Poet's Meaning. Bcefdes, it is true in Nature, that Heaviness of Heart, and any Oppreflion always make us humble and fubmiflive. Correct, without Scruple;,An heavy Heart bears BUTan humble Tongue. The Millake is easy upon these Monos lables, and may be found to have happen'd in several other Passages of our Author. I'll subjoin two or three Inllances, in which I believe every Body will agree with Me,-that the fame Error possesses the printed Copies.,ALL'S
-S.''^.-!o,: . ALL'S WELL THAT ESDS WELL, Page 439.,len are to ir.ell i::i, Bo)s are NOT to liss.,* mrel, from mder, to mingle, Here's a new Mi..am obtruded upon Us, that Boys are not to kifs. The Poet's Thought, I am p-rfaded, goes further, -i.' that Boys are fit only to kifs; Men to mingle with, and give more fubflanial Pleaiures. CorreB it;,Ale are . r: iell -.rh, Boys are BUT to k!s. ald O:.-e-Ion .'-'n.DTioN COMEDY OF ERRORS, Page 44o.,A!hs, ?or lmimen, iaus ni NOT believe (Beir.g corr.ia credit ) that )on love is; Trcs' others bare the Arm: jhew as the Sleeve, J{: inr.jsr lUt:ion t.:trn, asd yoZ ma mova e us. Nothnag can be more plain than the Poet's Sense in this Pffage. Women, fays He, are so easy of Faith, that only make them believe you love them, and they'll take the bare Profelt fin for the SUni.ance. Correct it;,AL-s, p;:r WrI'omer. m.ke us BUT believe, &c. ad O:.-'l CIM3ELISE, Page -7.,X.;, .d; NOT wonder at it; you are made R.b'r-r :o vonder at tbe Thiigs )o: hear, Thm to work aay. --- Surely, this is such a Mock-Reafoning that it cannot be SHARESPEARE'S, but in its Corrup- tion. What ? because he was made tteer to wonder at great Acions, than to perform any, is he therereforaidto --.'rer? I think it is evident, to Demonfiration, that common Sense demands this Reading from the Poet.,Na, ds BUT wonder at it; To: are ma.d R.:bther t wonder, &c. isatt-.oS. LLXV. Ibid. Page 4f.,A F.erd, a FAIRY, p:iilefs a.d rough, A Jrolf, :tay, ewrfe, &c. D-'r., here briinin Word in haftl that his Matter is arrelted, describes the Bailiff by Names proer to raise Horror and DereRaaion of such a Creature, such as, a Dezil, a Fiend, a Wolf, &c. Buthow does F.r, come up to these Ideas? Or with what Propriety can it be used here ? Does he men, that a Bllii is like a Faiy, in flealing away his Mailer ? The truell Believers or those litle Phantoms never pretended to think that they fiole any thing but Children. Cerainlv, i: will fort better in Sense with the other Names annexed, as well as with the Ch.-aar of a Catch-Pole, to conclude that the Poet wrote;,A Sir.d, a FURY, itilefi arnd rcgb, A hci;, &c. .S-ztTIC::. LXVI. Mcucq ADO AsoOUT NOTHISG, Page 4So.,Herset :? .; B:ll bere in Mefina, a;ad cb.lleig'd Cupid at the flight; and my Uorsle' Faol r:edi:g the Cballeige, fubfrib'dfior Cupid, and challeng'd bim at lth BURBOLT.,Thus
Thus the Copies, from the Quarto, publilh'd in 160o,.downwards, exhibit this Palffge. The Editor certainly ought to have given us the Glfs of Burrbolt. if theic be any such Word; but I apprehend it to be a Corruption. I take the Author's Mleaning to be no more than this: Be- redig challenged Cupid to fly with him, and the Fool made Cupid challengecBenedi7 to /hoot the Arrow with hhn. It muff tlcretore be reltorcd,,------ and challenged Him at the BIRD-BOLT; [or, BUT-BOLT.] Arrows, being employ'd either to let fly at a Bird, or a Mark, were by our Author's Predecef- fors call'd both Bird-Bolts, and But-Shafts, or Bolts; and He himfelflemploys the Words in other Passages of his Plays. LOVE'S LABOUR LOST, Page 132.,King. AY me! Birou. Shot, by Heaven. --- Proceed, sweet Cupid; TFot haft thlimpt him with thy,BIRD-BOLT ronder the Left Pap. TwELFTrt-NcIGHT, Page 479.,To be generous, guiltless, and of free Disposition, is to take those 7'hings for BIRD- BOLTS that y)o deem Canron-B/llets. ROMEO atd JULIET, Page 279.,Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! - - Stabb' with a white tench's BlackEye,,run thro' the Ear with a Love-Song, the very Pin of his Heart cleft with the blind Bow-Boy's BUT-SHAFT. LXVII. Ibid. Page 494. EslsEDArTO, Pedro. Mry V.or is Philemon's Roof; within the Hoife is LOVE. Hero. W'hy tChe your V[or hounld be thatch'd. I mull own, this Palage has appeared very obscure to me, and given me much Trouble ina attempting.to underltand it. This is a Scene in which the Acors are Masqueraders; and Pedro, the Prince of Airagosr, fixing his Discourse on Hero, asks her whether the will walk away with him ? Yes, fays She, when I like your Figure better ; for, God forbid, the Lute should be like the Cafe: i. e. that your Face should be as homely and as coarfeas yourMafque. Upon This, Pedro compares his Vilbr to Phi/leon's Roof. 'Tis plain, the Poet alludes to . the Story of Baneis and Philemon, from OVID: And this old Couple, as that Roman Poet de- scribes it, liv'd in a tha.ch'd Cottage;,--------.. Stiptl;r, & canna tesa palujfri. But why, ---. within the Hoife is Love ? Bancir and Philemon, 'tis true, had liv'd to Old- Age together, in a comfortable State of Agreement: But Piety and Hospitality are the Top Parts of their Character. Our Poet, if I am not mistaken, goes a little deeper into theStory. Tho' this old Pair liv'd in a Cottage, this Cottage received two Dfraggling * Gods under its Jupit Roof. So, Pedro is a Prince ; and tho' his Visor is but ordinary, He would inlinuate to Me:P Hero, that he has fomethinggodlike within : Alludhlg either to his Dignity, or the Qualities of his Person and Mind. By these Circumllances, 1 am sure, the Thought is mended : And I have no Doubt, but the Poet's Text ought tobe so too. Read, therefore, with only cutting offthe Tail of a lingle Letter;,Pedro. Mly Visor is Phileinon' Roof, within the Hoifie is JOVE.,LXVIIL
E.rz.iTtos. LXVIII. ALL'S WELL THAI ENDS WELL. Page 412.,zd. Lord. ------ Hess, he has a Stratagem for't; when your Lordjhip fees the Bottom,of his S ccefs in it, and to what Ietal this counterfeit Lump of OURS will be rekLed, .fjsn gie h bim not, &c. Why, c;zsserfet L.mP of OURs? 'Tis true, Paroler, of whom they are speaking, was of the fame Side in the Wars as They; but yet those Two Monofl/1ables are of no U se,nor add a Grain of Elegance to the Sentence; so far from it, They rather clog than are necessary. I do not therefore think, they are to be blotted out: But let us fee whether by a flight Change, they may not bear a Consonancy with the other Terms accompanying them, (vi. Metal, Liar., and melted;) and help the Propriety of the Poet's Thought. I am persuaded the Poet wrote, as it ought to be corrected;,a---- asd to -at lretal this ciunterfeit Lump of OARE will be melted, &c. For so one 3'etapbhr is kept up, and all the Words are proper and suitable to it. i-z atLss-. LXIX. The TEMPEST, Page 65.,On he Bat's Back ldofly After SU\MM.ER merrily. Wny, after Summer? -- have always fufpeted this Word, though the Editions concur in,the Reading. But is it true in Fat, thattheBat flies aser Summer ? * The * ra -,-r-.s E)re.,, (-sa r H;lp sleeps duringtheWinter, faythe iaturatlifs,andfodoestheBATtoo. V :ri- o. A ert isn Again, t Fiies and Grats are the favourite Food of the BAT, which he -iC;i.s ejfa.Xfu.acCiee :es; procures by fiying about in the Night. But this is a Diet, which, I pre- _amr -se oiz.r ups:. lasm ' fume, he can only come at in the Summer-Seafon. ,Another Obferra- -;m°-,,. ........... *i rtion has been made, that ± when BATS fly either earlier, or in greater 7Tv ,.JS .-s. %Srea ell s C .- hi, Nmber, than usual, it is a Sign the next Day will be hot and erene. ire - SCOeTmrm; 'Sr-ia fre. This Prognoflick likewise only suits with Summer. In Ihort, I am very Cn-ras, s rPi Gas.. . A-a;. apt to think the Paflige is corrupt, andwas not designed to have any Al-,lusion to the Season of the Tear, but rather the Hour at which Bats are accilom'd to fly. The Bat was call'd Vefpert.lio, fay the Et.ynologijis, by the Latines; (as it was, t.=;.; by the Greeks;) because this Bird is not visible by Day, 'but appears first about the Twilight of the Evening, and so continues to fly about during the dark Hours. From the Cuflom and Nature of this Bird therefore, it seems to me that It ought to be correc- Led;,On the Bat's B:ck I do si After SUN-SET merrily. *_ E,.rs;Os LXX. T.m.ia G of the SuHREw, Page z7f.,Host I bokh my Remedy; I m:ftgofet:b the HEAD-BOROUGH. Sly. 7sird, erforab, crfiftb Borougb, I'll answer him by Law; rl inot budge arlncb,,Boy; &c. I think. I ray withModefty affirm, either that Mr.PoPE never revised this Passage; or, if he did, that He did no: understand it. The Corruption has pass'd down thro' all the Copies; and None of the Edirors have pretended to guess at the Poet's Conceit. What a strange insipid, unmeaning Reply does Sy make to his Hostess! How do third, or fourtb, or fifth Borough re-ate to He;Dsr:n; ' The Author intended but a poor Witicifm ; and even That is lolt. The H5/ie would sav, that She'll fetch a Confia.le: But that Headborough was not SHAxE- SPE.'S Expreflion, dare warrant; and doubt not but the Readers will be of my Mind too. I a affr'd,thePalge came from our Poet's Pen thus;,Hotr,
Holt. I knew my Remedy; I muf gofetch the THIRD-BOROUGH. Sly. Third, or fourth, or fifth Borough, I'll anfwcr him by Law, &c. Who does not perceive, at a lingle Glance, some Conceit started by this certain Correaion? There is an Attempt at Wit, tolerable enough for a Tinker, and one drunk too. But what is hirdbirough? * The GLOSSARIES tell us, that it was an old Saxon Term for Confiable; and that Head-Borouh was allb -call'd Borough-Head, Bersholder, Third-Borough, Tything- Mat, &c. To This, if we look into our own .Setftuc-B osjs, no farther back than the zSth Year of K. Henry VIII. (Cap. to.) and not quite Thirty Years before the Birth of SHAKE- SP.EARE, we Ihall there find ITird-B rouih used for a Conjiaable. I have no Dnubt but the Use of the Word continued currently in People's Mouths in our Author's Time ; and I have this Reason for thinking so, because He uses it himself in an- other of his Plays, which he would hardly have chore to do, if it had been altogether anti- quated and laid alide. LovE's LABOUR LOST, Page 99.,Dull. I my self reprehend his own Perfo, for I p his Grace's THARBOROUGH. We know very well that NDlI, in this Play, represents the C.haracer of a Conflable: And there is no Question but Thirdborough is the very Word intended here: 'Tis probable, indeed, that the Author humouroufly makes Pll knock the Word out of Joint, and purposely fay Tharlorough for 7hirdbsrouigb, as he likewise makes him fay reprehend for represent. Our Poet very frequently plays with this Custom of the Vulgar, offrighting Englilh out of its Fits, as he calls it in his MExRRY WIVES of WINDSOR. LXXI. K. LEAR, Page z1. EIENDATION.,Well, my Legitimate, if this Letter speed, And my Invention.thrive, Edmund the base Shall T 0 th' legitimate ------ I fee no Reason in the World for the Break here, and leaving the Sense imperfec. I rather think the Poet wrote it.,Shall BE th' legitimate. i.e. Ihall quite fupplant-his Brother o.ut of his Father's 0Affc&ions, and fland himself in the Degree of his lawful'Hcir. LXXII. Ibd. Page 73.,-----.---- Fulloft 'tis seen Our MEAN SECURES us, and our meer Defets sProve our'Commoditier. I have-already, in-Page 37, quoted this-Paffage as one Authority of-the lPoet's making Use of Aidjelives futibantnlely: Bur, I muIt own, I- supea the Reading lot genuine. ' is cer- tain, 'tis good Sense to (ay that our Mlean Fortunes.may be a Seurity- to us, and our -I'alts an Advantage; but, I am sure, the Contralt both in Sense and Terms.will be much f-ronger, and the Variation not so great to Itartle us, if we may suppose, that our Author's Sentiment was This;,Bb --- Full * Third-Borough, Thrid-Borough, Thrith-Borough, Thri-Borough, or, more tcrruptedly, Thra-Borough, i a Conlable or rlch like Offcer mi the Third Parr of any Court, or Skire, so adiided, or caton'd. - Head- Borough (qlar/ Primns inter Parei) is the Foremnn only offich Conflable, &c. See LAuMBERTr's EXliCticn of Saxon Terms, and Dr. COWEL'S Interpreter of Lno Terms, in Conlabkle, Itead-Borough, Third-Boregh, &c.
--.----.-- Fll oft 'tis fee;, OaI MEANS ENSNARE is, and oar meer Defeds Prs:e :r CsOrr.s.:j i. E :- D.r!.: LXXIII. K. RICAR.D II. Page IZS.,Nor;h. 'lnd cad ovU fair Dfosrfe bhs been as Sugar,,J .Lag .ce hsrd Wayfmee: and delte able. £i3 the whole Tenoar of Nsrtsm6merlard's Speech here, 'tis plain, that he is in no Part pay- .i- any Compliment to his own Dicourfe, but to the Pleafhres and Advantages which he div'd orn rthe Soiery and Converfa:ion of Bilingbrfe, -which fweeten'd and made fIort rte Fatigue of a very rough Road. I dare fay theretore the Poet wrote;,Ardyet YOUR fair Difeoharfstb been as Sugar, llak:.g, &c. r'sm.w!5 . LX XN .. The F.'s Par ss K. HESRY IV. Page 266.,-- ---- ---- frffer'd b.:s Kifran March (Wo is, if ev'ry Oiwer were rigbtplar'd, - Inde, is King;) to be ENGAG'D i WVales, 7lr.re, zi'haue Rannfom, to lie forfeited. I think the Term, engged, is very much to be fufpeted here; for as itcannot ignifyi;mpa.- , it has no Consonancy, nor Agreement in Sense, with lying forfeited gwithout Ranjfm. The Truth of the History was this, lIornirer Earl of Mfarch was taken Prisoner, and close- !v confin'd in Wales by Owen Glendoser: Many Sollicitations weremade to K. Hena for redaminghi , h, but he would never lifen to it, fufpe&ing Alortimer of Treason; and so he canrinued o be a close Prisoner, till he found his Releafement by the Means of the Piercys Rcbellion. Corre& therefore, to correspond both with Sense and Hiflory,,----------- s be ENCAG'D in Wales, 7iere wilssit Rar.for to lie forfeited. LXXV. K. HENRY V. Page 44.,*ghi DAles, grestPrincer, Baronr, Lordsard KINGS. The Frencb King is speaking here to the Great Lords of his Court, and Army in all these pompous Titles. But why, King.? There was notone King amongst thembeides the Speak- er. To' this Error runs thro' all the Copies, corre& it,,H-gh 'Duis, great Princes, Barons, Lordr, and KNIGHTS. When the Battle is over, and we come to have an Account of the Loss on the Fremb Side, we find hat they had 0oo Knights dubb'd but the Day before the Battle: And that in the lcoro Men, which they loft, there were but 16oo who fought for Pay. The reft, as the Poet tells us, Page 4SIr. were,Pricres, Barons, Lords, KNIGHTS, Squires, Ard Gentlemen of Blood and Qsuality.,. XXVI ·
LXXVI. The Ferjf Part of K. HENRY VI. Page 66. EMN'iIroC.,I dare prefitme, sweet Prince, he thought no Harm. York. And if I WISH he did --- Here aain a Break is made without Occasion, and the Text is likewise slightly corrupted. Corre it,,And if IWIS, he did. i. e. if I. think:right, or know anyThing of the Matter, he did think Harm. To wis, and wist, (from the SAXON, Vwifan, Cognofcere) is a Word frequent both with CHAUCER and SPENSER. LXXVII. Second Part of K. HENRY VI. Page 123. EsEsn.TroN.,Come, come, my Lords, These Oracles are HARDLY attain'd, And hardly underflood. This is Part of a degraded Passage, which Mr. POPE thinks to he an nnneceffary Repetition. I am very free to own, as it is here, and in all the preceding Editions, exhibited, it seems to have so little Meaning, that it is very unworthy of our Author. But if by a very flight, yet certain, Alteration, can both give it a Meaning, and a fine Sentiment; it may be worth while to reatore the Poet his own Text. The Cafe is this: Eleanor, Dutchess of Gloacefler, resorting to Conjurers and Wizards to be refolv'd of the Fate of the King and several of the Court, is caught inthe Fa& by the Dukes of Tork and Bnckingham; the Parties being appre- hended, and their Papers seized, 2ork fays he'll fee the Devil's Writ; and reading over the Answers which the Wizards had given, and finding 'em intricate and ambiguous, he males this general Comment upon such Sort of Intelligence. But how are These Oracles hardly at- tainmed 'Tis plain, they were alually attained, and taken down in Writing; or the Difcove- rers could never have come to the Knowledge of them. Not only the Sense, but the Verse, labours, with the Corruption of this Passage: And I have not the leaIt Doubt but they are both to be reltor'd thus with the greateRl Certainty.,----------- Come, come, my Lords, Thefi Oracles are HARDILY attain'd, And hardly underflood. i. c. A great Rifque and Hazard is run to obtain them, viz. going to the Devil for them; as 'twas pretended and supposed: And likewise the incurring severe enaltiesbytheStatute-La. againlt such Prac&ices: And yet after these hardy Steps taken, the Informations are so per- plex'd that they are hardly to be underflood. LXXVIII. The 7tird Part of K. HENRY VI. Page 229, 30. E:.or:,.,..----.. - 7that Face of his, The hungry Canibals would not have touch'd, Would not have flai'd the Roses JUST with Blood, &c. 1 cannot but ffipe& this to be a Corruption. What can the Word juift import here? Does the Poet mean, that the Canibals would not have ju ft ain'd the Roses in his Chee!:s with Blood, i. e.. would not so much as have fetch'd Blood of him? Betides, that the Pofliion of the Words is forc'd,.I believe, SHAKESPEARE'had another Thought, and that we ought to read the Passage;,Would not haveflain',d the Roses JUIC'D aith Blood.,B b e.
ie. would no. have spi!t that Blood, whose Juices Ihone thro' his young Cheeks, bright gs the Vermiion Dye in Roses. ; . LXXIX. K. RICHARD IIL Page 366.,Deatb masts so Cor. es. of HI S ConpFrrr ; Fsr no. re I'ves i; Fame, tbo' Kot in Life. The Poet is here speaking of Jnalix CefJr, of immortalMemory. Bnt, methinks, it is no very notable Sentiment, that Dearh does not conquer That which conq4ers Him: It would be very extraordinary indeed,, if He did. I can -ferce think so exceptionable. aL.Expreffioi, crop:; rom onr Poet, bor ratherthat he wrote it thus; . -.:.; .-,De:rb 7;,mkes , Cort::.rf cf T H I S Conzierror; For r,, e be lirves in Fae, th' or tNrLifc. CEt:tirCr. LXXX . HKCa. XHE V1I. Page 458.,rey'e allr ue Legs, and iar:e ones; oe mrw ld talke t, (f7t r.ezer f;:s 'em pace before,) the Spavin Ari SPRING-HALT reir'd ramr 'n. ---- The Editor has taken this Word upon Content from the preceding Editions, but it mull be correced;,--------- th- Sp:ti. Ar. STRING-HALT reig.'d amnrg 'e. The Sr.g-Hak is a Diftenmer in Horses, which by a sudden Twitching up of the hinder Leg, makes them go lame.. ~E':: -os. LXXXI. TmTos of ArTENs, Page 8.,·h.o=di well 7&o1:er Lord Tirnon, tta: MEAN Erys Iaefsern The So,: aeove the Head. ¥vhy, r.ca Eyes, more than the Eyes of Persons of Figre? The Painter. I presume, here, h_- no D-fign or aionring the Poet by calling him either one of meaa Rank, or mean Ob- servation. It will, certainly, be more intelligible to write it thus;,---------- 2;ysu da well 7T jherV Lord Timon, that E N S Ej:s have feern h:e Fa:.: a'-or tbe Head. --.3r..._s. LXXXII. COSIOLASUS, Page I48.,Coriol. ------- Sall!,0 GOD ! ---- bt nft ssunwfe Patricians; whby, To7 grav, bt wretklefs Senators, have yao thusb Given Hydra .ere o cbhfe an Officer, &c. After this Exclamatibn, methinks, 'tis'very odd to contiinhe:the Sintence with such a'dir- junaire Ber: Besides, us the Text-now flands, there feeims that'ConttaloRf.Tetinstviahiting and broken off, which appears intended in this Paflage by the next immediate Liise. As the Addition of a single Letter reftdres us this Beauty, I make no Doubt but the Pfarage ought,Coriol.
Coriol. - -- Shall!,O GOOD, but most unwise, Patricians, why, rou grave, but wreaklefs, Senators, have you thus, &c. LXXXI!I. Ibd. Page I6.. EMENDATICo.,-------- Confider further, Zhat when he. speaks not like a Citizen, * To find ibi. like; a Soldier; do nrtari His rougher ACTIONS for malicious Surtdr; . But, s I fay, fchu as beaos a ,Sol4ier. I have no Manner of Apprehension how a Man's A/Sions can be mistaken for Words. If I were to do a fawcy Thing in Company to any One, I Ihould think it very extraordinary, if he told me, Sir, you give me very impudent Language. There feemst tne a manifelt Cor- ruption in the Text, thro' all the Copie .,and that, (or the fake of comon Sense, it ought to be corre&ed thus;,--------- Do not take His rougher ACCENTS for maliciotu Sounds, &c. LXXXIV. Ibid. Page o2o. EtnDATIOr .,Coriol. --------- You Gods I PRAY,,And the moil noble Mother of the World ,- Leave unfaluted. I dare fay, an old Corruption has possess'd this Passage, for two Reasons. In the firfi Place, whoever consults this Speech will find, that he is talking fondly to his Wife, and not pray- ing to the Gods at all: Secondly, if he were employ'd in his Devotions, no Apology -would be wanting for leaving his Mother unfaluted. The Poet's Intention was-cerainly this; Corio- lanI, having been lavilh in his Tendernefles and .Rptures to his Wife, bethinks'himfelf on the sudden, that his Fondness to her had made himgguilty of ill Manners in the Negle& of his Mother. Reltore, as it certainly ought to be;,. ---,-.- - You Gods! IPRATE, An . h the ofP noble Mother of the World Leave unfaluted. Mr. DENNmI, (than-whom, in my Opinion, no Man in Englad better underfands SHAKCE- SPEARE) in his Alteration .of this Play, :whether he made the ilame Correaion which I now do, certainly underflood the Passage exa&ly with me: An undeniable Proof of this, is anr Appeal to the Change in Expreflion which he has put upon it.,But Ob! ye Gods, wuiie-fondly ths I talk, See, the mol noble Mother of the World Stands uifaiited. I quefion not, but his Reason for varying the .Expreflioni was,-becaufe ,rte is a Term ill- founding in it self, and mean in its Acceptation. Our Language was not o refin'd, tho' more,masc~uline, in Sba~kepare's Days; and ·therer(nwwithhenand the vw -hen he is most serious, he frequently makes Use of Ihe W~ord. ~'But~fottr Pageseiftei~ wacd s in this very Play. we again meet with it. .."
---.----- ye bere be lets me prate Lire or 'th' S&or .. K. JoHt, Page I66.,If I talk to b;i, -.b 6:s i. eest Prate He will cas my Mercy. - - HAULET, Page 4Y8 . . .,And if 7tou prate of Jo um:inr, Ict thctm tblm .;: ASilli:rs f Acres on Us. . - Nor is i; infrequent with him to employ the Diminut'iv of this Term. TheTEIFErT, Page 43.,Mir. -------p- B:t I prattle,Something too aidly, snd my Father's precepts li forgst. M.EAsOS . for MEAStUoE, Page 401. Duke. Silece tt fellv; ------- I would be badforne Cause to prattle fir himself. OTrSLLO, Page . 6.,.-----. 0 ny SweSe, I prattle oiv of Fajhior, and I dose In mi.e ownr Cofort. r'SnOdTIos; . LXXXV. Ibid. Page 21o.,Acf. --------- Serb'd his Defignmenms,In my owr Perfor; HOP'D to reap the Fame Wrirb e did Irake all 6is; aridtookfore Pride l do myfeif this Wrong. How could A.fiSw hope to rep that Fame, which Coriolaus made all his'own, if he took a Pride in doing himself that Wrong? This was never the Poet's Meaning. Alfidius isan- rV that Ccrieolus over-top'd him so far, as to bear away the whole Glory;which the other reabronav iexpeaed to Ihare in, having contribnted .ll the Aftfltances in his Power towards 2a-niriDg it in Part=rfhip. Suitable to the Complaint of Agfidius, notwithstanding all the Copies concur in the Error, I have no Doubt but the Telt ought to be reftor'd,,---------- SerJ'd his DeiCime ns .....e In n.y own Pcrrf; * HOLPE to reap the Fme, &c.,*Or, f' . . . . LX.XXVI JtrcLs C£sWR, Page z49.,'s . CaarflOJMd be. Bea fl vs3 trea' , a.er., If lEisve Jdfi 6 ct he t davyfrfecr. * ' . '. No, Cfarfsallrn ; DagerSirsfiiull el : Ti2i, Csfar is ;,i:re daFgerou than He. WE HEARD ws. Liors li.t-r'd i one irj Ar. I, :he eider, and lmre serrible; AMd Car jhail gofortb. ----- l
All the Lines from the Aflerisk are degraded by Mr. POPE ; partly, I suppose, for the Rea- son which he gives ill his Preface for thefeDegradations; but chiefly, believe, because he did not underlhand them. The Copies, indeed, are all corrupt; and the Passage, of Course, Non- sense and unintelligible, till we look nearer and fee thro' the Disguise of the bad Text. But a flight Alteration will restore Sense to the Whole; and then the Sentiment will neither be unworthy of SHAKESPEARE, nor the Boast too absurd for Cefar in a Vein of Vanity to ut- ter. 1 dare warrant, This was the genuine Reading of our Author;,------ Danger knows fill well That Cwfar is more dangerous than He. WE WERE two Lions Altter'd in' ne Day, And I the Elder and more terrible; &c. i. e. Cfar and Danger were Twin-whelps of a Lion, and Cafar the Elder, and more ter- rible of the Two. LXXXVII. ANTON and'CLEOPATRA, Page 318. EMENDATION.,------ ly more Particular, And Tfat which most with rou Jhould SAVE my Going; Is Fulvia's death. Aotony is giving several Reasons to Cleopatra, which make his Departure from SREpt ab- folutely necessary; molt of them Reasons of State; but theDeath of Fnlvia, his Wife, was a particular and private Call, which demanded his Presence in Italy. But the Poet's Text, I find, in all the printed Copies, would rather make us believe that Fnlvia's Death Ihould pre- vent, or save him the Trouble of going. The Text in this Refpe&, I dare engage, runs counter to its Mailer's Meaning. Cleopatra is jealous of Antony's Absence, and suspicious that he is seeking Colours for his Going: Antony replies to her Doubts, with the Reasons that obliged him to be gone for a Time; and tells her that, as his Wife Filvia is dead, and so She has no Rival to be jealous of, that Circumltance flould be his belt Plea and Excuse, and have the greatest Weight with her for his Going. Who does not fee now, that it ought to be read.?,----- My more Particular, And that which mofl with you lhould SALVE my Going, Is Fulvia'. lDeath. LXXXVII. Ibid. Page 321. E DTO.,--- i common Body, Like to a vagabond Flag upon the Stream, Goes to, and back, LASHING the varying 7fde, To rot itfelfwith Motion. How can a Flag, or Rush, floating upon a Stream and that has no Motion but what the Flutuation of the Water gives it, be said to laJh the Tide ? This is making a Scourge of a weak ineffc&ive Flag, and giving it an ative Violence in its own Power. I don't know whether the Editor has adopted this Reading from any Authorities, or it be One of his 'own Conjeaure; the Generality of the Editions have it-riACKeN-: 'Tis true, there is no Sense in that Reading; and yetthe Addition of a single Letter-will'not only give ,s good Sense, but, I dare promire, the genuine Word of our Author into the Bargain. CorreCt,,Goes to and back, LACKYING the varying Tide, To rot itself with Motion..,i.
i. eoting backwards and forwards with theVariation of theTide, like a Page, or Lackey at his Mair's Heels. TheEdition which I have abovemademention of (inPage 38.) withMar. ginal Corrections in Mlsianrri?, concurs with Mein this Reading: As I have had thePleafure to find feeral more of my Emendations authoriz'd by the Conjeltures there inserted. a- DATKie. . LXXXIX. Ibid. Page 317.,-------- Br let :as rear 7! higheIr our Opini:s, :h;.: our S:;irng Can from tse Lap f ci.gypt's Wdaow plrci Tke NEAR h.f-weari-. Antony. Se:.zx-es onrPie, upon Hearing that An'eiy is every Hour expeaed in Rome, does not much reliish the News : He is twic e h Soldier (fiys He) that 0Cavitxs and Lepidus are; and I did not think the perty War which I am raiing would rotne him from his Amoursin .gypt. ---Bti why tfonld 'Porr.pf hold a h'gher Opinion or his own Expedition, because it awak'd A..-.;: to Arms, who vwas a!or.sf weary and surfeited of lafciviots Ple.fures ? The Copies re all defective, and the Editor follows them implicitly. Corread it,,------- but If us rear TIe L-;ger or Opir.on, trat oar Slir'r.g Cun fror: :e Lap o iE ypt'$ Idw- ps:ck T-e NE'ER-l/:.;---ea-e; d Antony. ,c. i Artsn, tho' s:..r rir'd of Lixury, yet 'mov'd from that Charm upon Poriey's Sfnng, it was Realon for PoSmy to pride himnclf upon bri.g of'fuch Consequence. Esx I -nuo. XC. Iid. Page ,-4-,-------- Behd this dMan, Co;ie-Er Zs r.i his L.ps thy -SAVOURING Hand; Kif i:, r.y Iarri.r : he habs fought to day, Ar if a God i: Hate of MarkLind had Deiroy'd in fulb a Shape. A.-crrv here recommends one of his Cptains, who had ought valiantly, to Cleopatra; andde- f.res e ma have the Grace of kifiing her Hand. But why, favouiring hand ? --- Antony did not wamt his Captain to grow in Love with his Mistress, on Account of the Flavour and Lusciousness of her Hand;but only to have a Reward of Hononr from'the Queen forhisgood Service. Tho'all theCopics join in thisReading, I muchrather believethe-Poe'sWord was,,Commer.d 7r.a bis Lips thy FAVOURING hald; XCI. TIITs AIDROSICus, Page 496.,Hsw ti'f a: F- bladi a Father, rad Mdloter 7 H;, r .':; Ibe bsg is. i ender gilded ITngs, Aid bui sla k',r;sir DOINGS in tek Air ? To baz la;ir 2 egs can cc-ianlv neitherbe Eogl/h, nor an Expreffionof SHAKESPEARE; rn- does i con-vea.v f:atisfaaov Inmge. Itis one of the ilmanfcript Conjcaures, (in the Mlarm n of that Edition which I but a litle bove took Noticeof,) that we oughtto read here, s I t:.nk there is no Dispute but we ought.,A,-d :: l;meir4.g DRONINGS in the A/r. This Word representing that heavy, sleepy Noise, made by the Fly, Chafer, Bee &c.,XCII.
XCII. Ibid. Page 4S. E:4.D.sr:o.,Te white-LIMB'D Walls, ye Ale-hotrf painted Signs, 'Thus the old Qoarto in 1611, the second Folio Edition, and all the subsequent Copies that I have seen, read with Mr. POPE; but the Poet's Epithet is slightly corrupted. Restore it.,2e white-LIMED Walls, - -- - It carries a Reproach to a Man, who makes a fine Appearance outward, and has no Virtues, or Bravery, within to set him off;,Introrjim tirpem, fpecioflm pelle decori, As HORACE calls it. The Term in our Author comes up exacly to the'Creek, one tured by St. Pauliagainlt AnanMa, * rrxe uYc.ov.. Et., Dealbate 'aries; which our Translation has *As xxiii. 3. render'd, thore whited Wall. XCIII. MACBETH, Page sC4. EmdrEDTIOr,We have SCORCH'D the Snake, not kil'd it.--- She'll close, and be herelf; ------ This is a Paflage which has all along pass'd current thro' the Editions, and likewise upon the Stage; and yet, I dare affirm, is not our Author's Reading. What has a Snake, cloing again, to do with its being fcorch'd? Scorching would never either separate, or dilate, its Parts; but rather make them inltantly contral and/hrivel. SHAKESPEARE, I am very wellperfuaded, had this Notion in his Head, (which how true in Fa&, I will not pretend to determine,) that it you cut a Serpent, or Worm asunder, in several Pieces, there is such an unaious Quality in their Blood, that the difmember'd Parts, being only plac'd near enough to touch one an- other, will cement and become as whole as before the Injury receiv'd. The Application of this Thought is to ~Dnncan, the murther'd King, and his surviving Sons: Macbeth conliders them so much as Members of the Father, that tho' he has cut off the old Man, he would fay, he has not entirely kill'd him; but he'll cement and close again in the Lives of his Sons to the Danger of Miasbeth. If I am not deceiv'd therefore, our Poet certainly wrot thus;,We have SCOTCH'D the Snake, not kiid it. ----- She'll clofi, and be her self; ----- Tofotch, however the Generality of our DiSionarie happen to omit the Word, fgnifies to notch, fia/b, cut with Twigs, Sword, yfc. and so SHAKESPEARE more than once has used it in his Works. So CORIOLANUS, Page 182.,Hewastoo hardforhim direiAly, to faythe roth on't: BeforeCorioli, he SCOTCH'D him, and notch'd him, like a Carbonado. And so again, ANTONY and CLEOPATRA, Page 393.,We'll bent them into Bench-Holes, I have yet Roormforfix SCOTCHES more. To (hew how little we ought to trust implicitly to DiAfionaries for Etymol/ole, we need no better Proof than from BilLY in his Explication of theTerm,SCOTC -Collops; he tells us,,C c that
tht it means Slices of Veal fry'd after the Scotch Manner: But, belides that that Nation are nc; over famous for the Elegance of their Cookery, it is more natural, and I dare fay more true, to allow that it oght to be wrote SCOTCHT-Collops, i. e. Collops, or Slices fJ-s'i cross and cross, before they are put on the Coals. Sed bac abitr. E L.T..ir:;. XCIV. Vil. Page S6i.,--------- Be die: agg, Ar.in .dre me : the Defsrt witb thy Sword; If :trirelLg I LNHIBIT, then protjti me Tbe Bay of a Girl. All the Editions before Mr. POpE'S, that I hive seen, read, If trembling I inhabit, which is unfnfferable Nonsense. I don't know whether the Editor's Reading be from any Authority, or his own Conje&are; but I am afraid it is not Englijh. There cannot be brought a Passage to .hee7 that Is.hibcs is ever used by the Latines as a Neuter or Deponent Verb, but always ar- tri.'e: And so with us, to ir.'hit, always signifies, to re/lrami, flop, some Thing else; never, to afifg, renege, &c. If therefore inhibit, be the Poet's Word here, (which I am not absolute- iy .Ltisfed about,) we moul corre& his Text thus;,If -Trrcsg M E inhibit, tten protest me - - : . - I the Pafion of Trembling, the Inluence of Fear upon my Nerves, prevent me from. iollowing Thee, &cr. J .O..a, ;.. XCV. Ib.d. Page s6-,TEere is nrt ONE of Tb.ni, btil in his Ho;rse I kep a &Srzvsntfie. Oxe of .Vi;z? --- i ncbto has j'fl said, that he heard MIacduff meant to disobey his Sum- mons, and not come to Court: And he would immediately subjoin, that there .is not a Man of :L:cxff's Quality in the Kingdom, but he has a Spy under his Roof. This is under- sicod, not eeirefi'd, as the Te.t now sands. For this Reason, and because there's a various Readi- in the second Fosio Edition, I am apt to think there's a flight Corruption in this Pas- .geó . Trat Copy exhibits it to Us thus;,fi-re's rs: a A ONE of them. Here we again meet with a D oeprsv'd Readin,; but it is such a One as will help us to he Poet's trxr Words. Corret, as it certainly 'ought to be rellor"d,,- T.e'S /: A THANE of tem, ---- e. a. ."%Scl r.: And so the Peers of Scodlsrd were all call'd, till Earls were created by Csl:'ri7e the Son of 'Dorcin. :x;--::os. XC\VI. IbE. Page 5c.,IFbh can imprefis te Frrefl, bid tie r;ee U.fix his esr-b-ur.ad Root? ---- Sweet Boldemsnts! Gsod! Rrsellir.s DEAD rfe sever, till the IWeod Of Birnam r.re, Thus all the Impressions, from the very Beginning, exhibit this Pafage; but I cannot imagine what Notion the Editors could have of the Dead being rebellious. It looks to Me, as if tiev were content to believe the Poet .oenrm;r, wherever he was myfltrions beyond being un- vrflccd. The Emendation of one Letter will give us clear Sense, and the very Thing wh'ch saLrbe:hb Could be fupos'd to fay here. Reltore it.,Rcbellons
* Rebellious HEAD ri;e never, till the Wood Of Birnam r;fe, * Or, Rebellion's Head. i. e. Let Rebellion never make Head againll me, till a Forefi move, and I shall reign long enough in Safety. Shakespeare very frequently uses the Word Head in this Manner, of which I'll subjoin an Example, or two. Firjf Partef K. HENRY IV. Page 249.,--.-- Douglas, and the English REBELS mes -Th' Eleventh of this Month, at Shrewsbury. m mighty and a fearful HEAD they are, &c. SecondPart of K. HESRY 1V. Page 307.,For his Divisions, as the Times do brawl, Are in three HEADS; one TPow'r againf the French, &c. CORIOLANUS, Page 13z.,When Tarquin made a HEAD for Rome, he fought Beyond the Mark of Others. XCVII. Prologue to TROILUS and CRESSIDA.,--...--- Priam's fix-gated City, Dardan, and Timbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien, And Antenoridas, with nmaffy Stapler, And correfpotiive and fufilliing Bolts, STIR tsp the Sons of Troy. - I have no Notion, in what Sense a City, having fix strong Gates, and those well barr'd and bolted, can be said to stir up its Inhabitants: Unless that they may be fuppos'd to derive some Spirit from the Strength of their Fortifications. But I do not take this to be the Poet's Thought. The second Folio Edition reads it thus;,ISTIRRE t.p. the Sons of Troy. This.odd Manner of Spelling the Word both gaveme a Suspicion of the-Place being corrupt, and adminifter'd tomy Coniecture for.relloring it. The Author, I take it, means no more than This; that the Greeks have pitch'd their Tents upon the Plains before Troy; and that the Trojans are securely barricaded within the Walls of their City. I have no Doubt therefore but we ought to read;,SPERRE r.p the Sons of Troy. For, tofperre, orffar, (from the old T'etonic Word, fteret,) signifies topnt. up, defend by Bars, &c. And in this very Sense I remember CHAUCIER uses the Term in the fifth Book of his Iroilts and Cressida.,Fir when he saw her Doores fperred all, Well nigh for Sorrow 'adown he gan to fall.,Cc a I little
G I ;:;e ·icred, when I fitrs quo:ed the above Passage, that it would have afforded Matter -::-^.'TIe:. for further Correcion: But 1 ftid hat even in the Names of Troy's Gates we meet with,Somr of them, that are no where else to be met with. I don't remember, indeed, that ei- thr Di-d:.:'i E£jf:rbas, S o;i :,.. or any of the more modern Commentators upon Ho- aetr, r.niif us with a Liti r.i their Names: If they had, I doubt not but the Editor would have sei them r:ht from those Authorities ; Not even the laborious Commentator upon Lyos- firs ,whret we 'mighthave epFeCa it, has touch'd this Matter. I am aware, that in Himer the S.c=r and D-rL .:r;a Gates are said to be one and the fame; and so the fix Gates would be rdnuc'd ,ojf . B-: notsiilifianding This, they are enumerated as ourPoetmeant to set them out: Th.l- -LrarnedSir Ei-.'ard ShCTrbari in his Notes upons the Troades of SENECA,Page 324. tells ur, t- Troy tsaifix G:ate, viz. ;ie Antenorian, rte Dardanian, tke ilan, the Cammbrian, :.. Troian, azi :t Scarn. He quotes us no Authority for this, butI believe Ican trace him in the A'ccount. For CERDA, upon the fix hundred and twelfth Verse of the second Aneid of aIVlG., informs us trom D;re- Pi-rgiaus; --- Trojan r arbisportas sex enumerat Dares; ntenoriden, Dardaniam, Iliam, Sczam, Catumbriam, Trojanam. Here again, if I am not mifLisen, we meet with frefn Corruption. Catuir.lria is a very oddWord; and,I am well 1fisied a deprav'd One. We are to know, there was near Old Troy, a Plain call'd 7Iym- r-- a iR'er, that run through it, call'd Thnmbrias;and aTempleto lpollo Thymlbruer. The Gate, that we are fpeairingo .was probably defcrib'd in the Greek Author to be uall oveponv, tee Ga-te that sca'd the aforefai Plain and River : And from thence, as I fufpec, by the Ne- l"i-..c- or lgmorance of the Tranfc.rier, the Words were join'd and corrupted into Ca- - r.. Tae correctsr Editioas of Dsres '°hr)gius, I know, neither read as Sir Edward S,-rtr :-, nor as C:rd; upon p7Irgl ive os the Paflage, but thus; Ilio portas fcit (Jfil. Pri-,- r'ee ) r-.r: r r--:'":ir.a klc -[,~, Antenorid2, Dardaniz, Ilis, Sca, Thymbrem, Trojana. 1 doue nrt but the Author ought to be correted by this Authority;,--- Priam's .S: Gates .?b' Ci, Dardania, TsHYSura A, Ilia,. Sca, Trolen, Ar.d Antenorides, w-tsb rafy Staples An.d srrpesnive ;: d f:Gl.iflIi;g, Bo/ts, Serre : 7 rte Sr.s of Troy. :'a-ro . Tox I. XG -I. R ciLus and CREsIDA, Page t.,Ard l'i'e as t'ere were Hisbsandr in War, Befjre trb Szr. rOf, he ais b;rseft LIGHT,. Ardio te FeUlgies H: --- Wnv, harnet lgL ?. Does the Poet mean that HeSar had put on sigk Armour ? Or that he was r rig/t?' in his Arms, even betore Sunrise ? Or is a Conundrum aim'd at in, Sun rose, and bairnel l:;= ?- Avery ifight Alteration makes all these Conftru&ions unnecessary; and gives us the Poet's Mening in the popereft Terms imaginable. I am inclin'd to think he wrote:,Bere ttSe S;!r rs:, He was a.;rrefs-DIGHT, Eic. -.. corm.ie.!ly dreil, accoutred in Arms. It is frequent with our Poet, from his Maiers, CF.AvcER and SPEsxSEa, to fay digtg for deck'd, pight forpistchd, &c. L.=.r:a-C. XCIX. L-.2. Page ..,Paris, a:d Troilus, 2o bhave Botb/fad well, "; *-^ i . AND .N :l:e Ca;.fe aid Qjeflioto now in Hand,Ha7e glofi'd, o:,:fuerf.ially. -- I can neer; s ti.7 th-t the Poet esorefs'd himself thus : 'Tis absurd to fay, that People have tei'weI. s!/ ad vC:r b'-rff,.:sii.'v at the fame Time. I am persuaded (as above in Page 66.) t-e. C i;'ti:-r is h ere nilta.n;nly 6tu for the Diyj:.rt ive; and that we ought to reflore it;,Paris
Paris and Troilus, you have Bothfaid well, BUT on the Canfe and QueJfion now in hand Have glofi'd but superficially. .e. You have argued very well in the general, but have glofs'd too superficially upon the particular Quellion in Debate. C. CYMBELINE, Page 178.,------- and Igrieve Myself To think, when bhotjhalt be DIS.EDG'D by Her Whom now Tho# tir/f on, &c. Notwithstanding the Antitlefis that there is betwixt dif-edg'd and tireft on, yet, methinks, too gross an Image is convey'd for so referv'd and modet a Princess as Imogn. i. would suppose that our Poet wrote, with a very small Variation;,.----- and lgrieve Myfyelf To think, when Thou /halt be DIS-SIEG'D by her, &c. i. e. displa'd, put out of her Favour. Piege, it is well known, was the old Word used for feat, place, as also rank, dignity, &c. So the King, in HAMLET, Page 44' .,---.--. Tour Summ of sParts Did not together pluck such Envy from Him, As did That One, and that, in my, Regard, Of the unworthiefi SIEGE. --- So, in OTHELLO, Page 48z.,.-.... 1 fetch Life and Being From Men of worthieJf SIEGE. --- And so, in MEASURE for MEASURE, Page 382.,Belides, upon the very SIEGE of Jnflice Lord Angelo hath to the publick Ear Profefi'd the contrary. 'Tis certain, supposing my Conje&ure to be right upon the Palsage now in Queflion, ShAKE- SPEARE might as well have said difplac'd, as dijleg'd, by her; but I appeal to all the nicer and more Critical Readers of our Poet, whether it is not his Cultom, to love an unusual Term where a common one might serve his Turn. As I presume He has here chose diJiege to an- fwer diflace, so in his CORIOLANUS he has industriously adopted another Word to express the fame Meaning. Page i32.,----- ir, I hope, my Iords DIS-BENCH'D you ot. --,CI.
Ess.i-o;, Ci. nIi. Page 161.,----- THIS IS HER HONOUR; Le. i: bgrns:ed 2.1a b.e: fren sll thrs, TPrYi: be ro )our Rerremirar.ce, tbe 5Defcrip.:io Of s't is it. ern Chbambr nstbing faes The ':gert j. lae laid. ' ' To be S brief as poSble in my Reasons for fufpesing this Pafage. --- yachiro, a Liber- tine in his Thonghts of Women, wagers with PotihDms that he will debauch his Wife, so tha: he can once et Access to her. PiJfbzisxs takes the Bett, and makes Way by Letters to his Wife for jrcii:s's Introducion. Jacbimii impudently pretends to have carried his Point; and, in Confirmation, is very minute in describing to the Husband all the Furniture and Adorstns et .his Wife's Bedchamber. But how is fine Furniture anyways a Princess's Honour ? I sis an dpats: fuiable to her Dignity, but certainly.mkes no!Part of her Cha- raer. I am ptrfuaed the Poet intended his -'ofibimrs -Ihold fiay, This particular De- '" lfrion, that yon make, can't convince me that I've loft my Wager ;yourlemory'is good; ' and Some of these Things you may have leam'd from a third Hand ; I therefore expect " Proofs more direct and suthentid;." If I do not deceive myself therefore, there is little Queflona but we ought to restore the Place' thus:,---- WHAT'S THIS T'HER HONOUR ? Let . be grsr-ec, Ta h~w e fecrn all This, Pr.fe be:, &c. :--:.:TI.a-.. CII. I':d. Page .16.,Our Britain's HEARTS d e fj.ng, it ocr Mer ; bo Darkzfi fe S. fee t Sv.ls :bt fl bisards ! 1 fioald have loo''d upon This in the Rank of a mere-iteral Error, but that I find it is so faitrhflly Copied from the old Editions; which makes me believe the Editor did not attend :o the Paet's Sense in it. Correc, with the greatet Certainty;,Oar Eritain's HARTS ade flir.g , ts: on Men ;' &c. i. e. our Hars, or St:.i, receive tteir Death as they fly; our Men fland boldly to it, and die fighting. t---r*s_.«t. CIII. Ro.xzo and JULIET, Page zfo.,As is the -B ar bi.-aitb an e.rc:o:ri. l'<rr, Err e rse fresd hi;s fr.et Leavts to the Air, Or:kd'cste bis Beagjr t;tbe'SAME. Sure all the Lovers of Shafcpe'are and Poetry will agree with me that ---to ttEfme ----'is here a very idle, dragging Pasralerosmrick, as the Grammarians style it. I do not think the Author was any ways neceftitated to it, fince-hemight by-an additional-Epithet in the fore- goingVerfe have avoided the Fault objeced, and exore&'d his Thopghrwithmore Elegance: As thus,,Ere be cs s irecd hi; fw:ree and infant Leaves, Or ;di:te bis B1c.s: to the Air.,This
This would havebeentheNaturalWay of conveying his Idca,without those unpleafinggxpiletit;es But SHAKESPEARE generally in his Similies is accurate in the Cloatbing of them; andthere- fore, Ibelieve, would not have over-charg'd This so insipidly. When we come to conlider that there is some Power else besides balmy Air, that brings forth, and makes the tender Buds spread Themselves, I do not think it improbable that the Poet wrote thus,E're He cavfpread is sweet Leaves to thi Air, Or dedicate his Beauty to the SUN. * * Or Sunne, attaerr to the old SPeling, Uish brig itanarer ro the Traces ofthecorrhted Text . CIV. Ibid. Page 2z9. EMENDATIO:t.,We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a Scarf, Bearing a Tartar's painted Bow of Lath, Scaring the Ladies like a CROW-KEEPER. If there ever was such a Thing as a Crowkeeper, in Nature, I mull own it is an Employment quite out of my Acquaintance. And surely, the Poet cannot be supposed to intend by it, a Man arm'd to keep off the Crows ? .-- I would read it, calhiering only afingleLetter;,Scaring the Ladies like a COW-KEEPER. The Herdsmen of Old were used to watch in the Field, with Bows and Arrows, to defend their Cattle either from Dogs, or any other Injuries: Objets very likely to feare the Ladies, both from the Size of theirBows, and their aukward Method of managing them. What gives me the Foundation for this Suspicion and Emendation is the following Passage in K. LEAR, Page 86.:,Lear. 7'here'syour Prefi-mony. --- That Fellow handles hir Bow like a COW-KEEPER. For so Mr. POPE has very rightly rellor'd it ;tho' thefecond Folio Edition, (as does also my Quarto, publifh'd in 65'5.) reads it here too absurdly --- Crowkeeper. CV. HASLET, Page 382. EIEK:DATrOlu;,Mean tirme, we thank you for youtr Well-TOOK Laboor. I have Nothing to objec to the Sense of this Passage, which I forgot to take Notice of inmy Examination of this Play. The second Folio Edition however has a various Reading, which gives some Room for fufpeting the Text as it now (lands. It is there,,Mean time, We think Tor foryour Well-LOOK'D Labour. It is probable the Poet might, therefore, have wrote,,Mean time, We thankyou foryoer WeI-LUCK'D Laborrr. To fay,that their Labour had been well-took, is faying, methinks, only that they had notlabsorf, in vain: But to fay it was well-lirck'd, is palling a Sort of Complement on the Addrefi, Shill, and Good Fortune, of the Persons employ'd in it. This ConjeAure is of no great Momenr, but I embrac'd the Mention of it the more rea- dily, becaufc it lends me an Opportunity.of correfting. Myself upon Another Passage of the fame Play. I should reckon it very dilingenuous, as well as ridiculous, in a Work which I have profefs'd to have undertaken for the Reitoration of SLHAKESPEARE, if I Ihould be alham'd to own myself miflaken, and retrat the Error. In my Eighty Ninth Remark upon * HAMLET, * Pag. ,9. ,- I have call'd in Queflion the Text upon two Pafages,. where the Poet has made Use ot the seq.,Word
Wod- UNBATED. To avoid Repitition and Prolixity, I (hall beg Leave to refer the Rea- ders b-:k to that Note. Since my Beginning this Appendix, I have chang'd my Opinion 2nd begin to think the Text may rather be exp'aie'd, than di/ltirb'd or alter'd. The Poet is f-anir.g of Swcrds and -F.:ls, and by a Sword UNBATED, perhaps, hemay mean a Sword nr.-s:cd, or nor robb'd of its Point, to diltinguiih it from a Fo)l, which is bluntid and charg'd t the End with a Izt : n. If we are to suppose the Poet wrote litbaited, ordaub'd over with an Oinener, (as I there conje&lred.) it is absurd for Laertes to reply to the King, who tells him he might eafliy chafe a Sword ready bnited, that he would anoint his Sword for the Par- Ser: Nor cm there be any Occa!ion in the Seor.i Pallage for the Epithet ENVENOM'D as o-:.e;a fign~ies t.e fa'e TFing. Ent I submit. Both Opinions to Judgment. tt:-:.-r:-:: ; CVI. OrHELLO, Pag ;454.,7r-dgc k .-e e i' lsr'd, if 'tit ..ctgrofs in Senof, Tse Te hai . 1r.- .ri'd ro: Her with foul Charmr, Abosi'd 'r ld'iSSe l':zt w-ib Drr:g, or AIineralo, 1T2t we.:ke MOTION. :Z)-/rjmss h aving ri!l'n in Love and married with Othello, Brabantio, her Father, accuses Ort:tr' of having ased some foul Play, and intoxicated her by Drugs.and Potions to win her over to the March. But why, Dr:,gs to weaken llotion ? How then could She have run away with him voluntarily from her Father's own House ? Had she been averse to chufing O:tlEL, tho' he had given her Med cines tha took away the Use of her -Limbs, might She not fill have retained her Senses, and opposed the Marriage ? Her Father, 'tis evident from if.ver- of his Speeches, is pofirive that She mull have been abtfed in her rational Faculties, or She could not have made so prerofterous a Choice as to wed with a loor, a Black, and re- fife the fineet Young Gentlemen in Ien;ice. What then have We to do with her Motion be- ing wezen'd ? If I understand any Thing of the Poet's MAeaning here, I cannot but think he zilio have worne,,A':is'd C'.r 'de!irte l a:b -itb Drgs, cr lln:rals, Th 'werkenr NOTION. i. . her ,Arrenr.fir., right Cc;::.aein, and Idea of Things, Undcrfianding, 7iudgment, &c. 'Tis frequent with us to Pay, We have no Notion of such a Thing, when we would mean, re do not very clearly underiand it. The Claics, I think, have employ'd the Word in the -lnme Sense: And CicEo., I remember, to quote no worse an Author, has defin'd it thus ifor U. NOTIOS£Eoe\: esi/, rsud Graci trim ..-:5, fin R cxtvw. :-aE.. -:. -CVII. 'id. Page SSS.,Ih.: if I si;, I'.irfen isr dhm Jy aWreng r Or hearl btim frs,.-as Kjnaes be ficb abroad, W'a l-.ir:g r tlie.r ow: ir.p.rt:onate Suit, Or .:',:ica.y a rtsge jofrme Alijfrefs, Convinced, or SUPPLIED them, cannot crbeh Btc t-rey mft bhic. --- I could not have wish'd to conclude with a more remarkable Instance of Corruption, or One that fell more closely within the Method which I propos'd to my self of amending. All the Editions concur in the Reading, and yet I'll be bold to fay, 'tis neither Seail, nor intellgible, -ror conveys our Author's S.e;iar.et as it hands: So that it may fairly be look'd upon to -have been one of his L:i deirat;. His Meaning is undoubtedlyThis; That there are some -fcch long-tongued Knaves in the World, who, if they thro' the Force of Importunity obtain a Favour from their Mifirefi. or if thro' her own Fondness they make her pliant to their -Deies, cannot help boalting of their Succels. Reilore it, without the leat Scruple, thus;,/She
t/o having by their own importrunate Suit, Or voluntary Dotage of some Miflrefs, Convinc'd, or SUPPLED the;, they cannot chufe But They mrj blab. I have already obferv'd, in the Course of these Sheets, that it is usual with SHAKESPEARE, thro' Negligence or Licentiousness, to change his Numbers, as he does here: So no more need be laid on that Head. Tofipple, 'tis well known, is to make pliant and flexible; and is particularly a Term in Surgery, when any Part, fwoln and stiff, is by Fomentations, &c. reduced, and madefoft andpliable. To convince, here, is peculiar in its Sense; it is not, as in the common Acceptation, to make sensible of the Truth of any Thing by Reasons and Arguments; but to overcome, get the better of, &c. As the Usage of the Term in this Sort is one of the Author's Singularities, I'll produce two or three Passages, in Support of This before us, where it bears the fame Sense. MACBETH, Page 58o.,Ay, Sir, there are a Crew of wretched Soulr Thatflay his Cure; their Malady convinces The great ffay of Art. LOVE'S LABOUR LOST, Page 173.,And tho' the mourning Brow of ~Progeny Forbid the smiling Courtesy ofLove, The holy Suit which fain it would convince, &c. And so in* CYMBELINE, more aptly to the Place for which I bring these Authorities; 36.,* sagt 136. Tour Italy containes None rs accomplijia'd a Courtier to convince the Honour of my MWllrefs. At tandem lManum e Tahbuli. --- I have endeavour'd to acquit my self of the Promises CoeSCLuION. made in my Introdiiuion, and produc'd, and corre&ed, Errors throughout the Poet, nume- rous, when we confider This as a SPECIMEN only; of no Number, when compar'd with that unequal Quantity, which-remain behind in Store to make our Author perfeB. I may, indeed, fay with Mr. POPE, thatI have gone thro' this Work with more Labour than I can expect Ihanks: I have run a Rifque, and must wait the Sentence of the Publick, whether I have gone upon a mistaken View of Reputation, or whether I have done any Thing to set SHAKESPEARE in a clearer Light than his Editors have hitherto done. It is upon this Issue I fiall be determin'd, whether I have already written too much on the Subje&; or, whether I may promise my self Encouragement in prosecuting a Delign, that favours more of publick Spirit than private Interest. I ought to be in some Pain for the Figure that these Sheets may make, this being the firfi Essay of literal Criticlfm upon any Author in the ENGLISH Tongue. The Alteration of a Letter, when it restores Sense to a corrupted Passage, in a learned Language, is an Atchieve- ment that brings Honour to the Critick who advances it: And Dr. BENTLEY will be remem- ber'd to Poflenty for his Performances of this Sort, as long as the World fiall have any Es- teem for the Remains of Menaander and Philemon. But 1 no more pretend to do Juflice to that Great Man's Chara&er, than I would be thought to set my own poor Merit, or the Nature of this Work, in Competition with his.,D d I mulf
I muit eteR some Attacks of Wit, upon being engag'd in an Undertaking of so much Kr.LT. : The Aflanlts that are meerly id&e, or meerly JtIleratic, 'I hall have· ehe Resolution to deile: And, I hope, I need be under no great Concern for Those, which can proceed from aig.sr Ar/gsA-.fl. Whrerever I am mistaken, it will be a Pleasure to me to be cor- reed, lince the Pnblick will at the fame Time be undeceiv'd: And wherever'I have the Lclrk to be right in any Obfenration, I fltter my self, Mr. POPE himself will.be pleas'd, that SEASESPXARE receives some Benefit. But to p-si from Apologies on Account of there Sheets, however they may be recei- ved; I have a Number of Pardons to beg of my SUBSCRIBERS, who have done ine the Honour to waitfo long for my Trjflti'-in of jEscaYLUs. My bellt Plea will be, that i hTve, in this Interval, been at the Expence of Coppar Plates to be prefix'd to each Play. r- a I may by Ornament, at least, make up in Part for the Defeas of my own Power, And as the DIssERTATION, to-be prefix'd to that Work, is defign'd a compleat History of the Ar.e:ens STAGE in all its Branches, I hope it will be agreed in my Favour, that the Me.ri.s for such. a Col!eaion must be inric'd by the Delay.,F I N I S. FINIS. Kext Wedi wdle e 'Pillil'ed, THE Lives and mcft remsrkableMaximsof the AncientPhilofophers. Translated from the,Freedb of the famous Moanieur Tetlon, Archbishop of Cambray.