ghost.:
hor.: that can i, at least the whisper goes so. our last king, whose image even but now appear'd to us, was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway, (thereto prickt on by a most emulate pride) dar'd to the fight. in which, our valiant hamlet, (for so this side of our known world esteem'd him) did flay this fortinbras: who by feal'd compact, well raised by law and heraldry, did forfeit (with his life) all those his lands which he flood seiz'd of to the conqueror: against the which, a moiety competent was gaged by our king; which had return to the inheritance of fortinbras, had he been vanquisher, as by that cov'nant and carriage of the articles design'd, his fell to hamlet. now young fortinbras, of unimproved mettle hot and full, hath in the skirts of norway, here and there, shark'd up a lift of landless resolutes, for food and dyet, to some enterprize that hath a stomach in't: which is no other, and it doth well appear unto our state, but to recover of us by strong hand and terms compulsative, those foresaid lands so by his father loft: and this, i take it, is the main motive of our preparations, the source of this our watch, and the chief head of this posthaste and romage in the land.
ber.: 'tis here
hor.: 'tis here
mar.: it faded on the crowing of the cock. some fay, that ever 'gainst that season comes wherein our saviour's birth is celebrated, crows.
ghost.: the bird of dawning singeth all night long: and then, they fay, no spirit walks abroad, the nights are wholsome, then no planets strike, no fairy takes, no witch hath power to charm; so hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
king.: though yet of hamlet our dear brother's death the memory be green; and that it fitted to bear our hearts in grief, a'd oi~ whole kingdom to be contracted in one brow of woe; yet so far hath discretion fought with nature, that we with wisest sorrow think on him, together with remembrance of our selves. therefore our sometime sifter, now our queen, th' imperial jointress of this warlike state, have we, as 'twere, with a defeated joy, with one auspicious, and one dropping eye, with mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, in equal scale weighing delight and dole, taken to wife. nor have we herein barr'd your better wisdoms, which have freely gone with this affair along, (for all, our thanks.) now follows, that you know young fortinbras, holding a weak supposal of our worth; or thinking by our late dear brother's death our slate to be disjoint and out of frame, colleagued with this dream of his advantage; he hath not fail'd to pelter us with message, importing the surrender of.thofe lands loft by his father, by all bands of law to our most valiant brother. so much for him. now for our self, and for this time of meeting: thus much the business is. we have here writ to norway, uncle of young fortinbras, who impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress his further gate herein. in that the levies, the lifts, and full proportions are all made out of his subjects; and we here dispatch you, good cornelius, and you voltimand, for bearers of this greeting to old norway; giving to you no further personal power of treaty with the king, more than the scope which these dilated articles allow. farewel, and let your hafe commend your duty.
king.: 'tis sweet and commendable in your nature, to give there mourning duties to your father : but you must know, your father loft a father, that father his, and the survivor bound in filial obligation, for some term to do obsequious sorrow. but to persevere' in obstinate condolement, is a course of impious stubbornness, unmanly grief it shews a will mors incorrect to heav'n, a heart unfortify'd, a mind impatient, an understanding simple, and unfchool'd: for what we know must be, and is as common as any the must vulgar thing to sense, why should we, in our peevish opposition, take it to heart ? se ? 'tis a fault to heav'n, a fault against the dead, a fault to nature, to reason most absurd, whose common theam is death of fathers, and who still hath cry'd, from the first coarse, 'till he that died today, "this must be so." we pray you throw to earth this unprevailing woe, and think of us as of a father: for let the world take note, you are the most immediate to our throne, and with no less nobility of love, than that which dearest father bears his son, do i impart tow'rd you. for your intent in going back to school to wittenberg, it is most retrograde to our desire: and we beseech you, bend you to remain here in the cheer and comfort of our eye, our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
ham.: i would not ' hear your enemy fay so; nor shall you do mine ear that violence, to make it truer of your own report against your self. i know you are no truant; but what is your affair in elsinoor ? we'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
hor.: twonights together had these gentlemen, marcellus and bernardo, on their watch, in the dead ware and middle of the night, been thus encountred. a figure like your father, arm'd at all points exactly, capape, appears before them, and with solemn march goes flow and stately by them; thrice he walk'd, by their opprest and fearsurprized eyes, within his truncheon's length; whilst they (diftill'd almost to jelly with the a& of fear) stand dumb, and speak not to him. this to me in dreadful secrecy impart they did, and i with them the third night kept the watch, where as they had deliver'd both in time, form of the thing, each word made true and good, the apparition co
hor.: my lord, i did; but answer made it none; yet once methought it lifted up its head, and did address it self to motion, like as it would speak: but even then the morning cock crew loud; and at the found it shrunk in haste away, and vanisht from our sight.
ham.: if it assume my noble father's person, i'll speak to it, tho' hell it self should gape and bid me hold my peace. i pray you all, if you have hitherto conceal'd this fight , let it be d treble in your silence still : and whatsoever shall befall tonight, give it an understanding, but no tongue i will requite your loves: so, fare ye well. upon the platform 'twixt eleven and twelve i’ll visit you.
ham.: your love, as mine to you : farewel. my father's spirit in arms ? all is not well; i doubt some foul play: would the night were come; 'till then st sill, my foul : foul deeds will rife, (tho' all the earth o'erwhelm them) to mens eyes.
laer.: think it no more: for nature crescent does not grow alone, in t thews and bulk ; but as his temple waxes, the inward service of the mind and foul grows wide withal. perhaps he loves you now, and now not soil nor cause doth besmirch the virtue of his g will: but you must fear his greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own: for he himself is subject to his birth; he may not, as unvalued persons do, carve for himself; for on his choice depends the sanity and health of the whole state. and therefore must his choice be circumfcrib'd unto the voice and yielding of that body whereof he's head. then if he says he loves you, it sts your wisdom so far to believe it, as he in his peculiar act and place may give his saying deed; which is no further, than the main voice of denmark goes withal. then weigh what loss your honour may fultain, if with too credent ear you lift his songs, or lose your heart; or your charte treasure open to his unmafter'd importunity. fear it, ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, and keep within the rear of your affection, out of the shot and danger of desire. the chariest maid is prodigal enough, if he unmask her beauty to the moon: virtue it self escapes not calumnious strokes, the canker galls the infants of the spring, too oft before their buttons be difclos'd; and in the morn and liquid dew of youth contagious blastments are most imminent. be wary then, best safety lies in fear; youth to it self rebels, though none else near.
oph.: i shall th' effect of this good lesson keep, as watchman to my heart. but good my brother, do not, as rome ungracious pastors do, shew me the steep and thorny way to heav'n; whilst like a puft and careless libertine, himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, and recks not his own reed.
laer.: oh, fear me not.
pol.: yet here, laertes. get aboard for shame, the wind sts in the shoulder of your fail, and you are (laid for there. my blessing with you;and these few precepts in thy memory see thou character. ' give thy thoughts no tongue, 'nor any unproportion'd thought his aet: ' be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar; ' the friends thou hari, and their adoption try'd, ' grapple them to thy foul with hooks of steel: ' but do not dull thy palm with entertainment ' of each newhatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. beware ' of entrance to a quarrel: but being in, ' bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee. ' give ev'ry man thine ear; but few thy voice.take each man's censure; but reserve thy judgment. costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, but not expreft in fancy; rich, not gaudy: for the apparel oft proclaims the man, and they in france of the bel rank and station are most select and generous, chief in that. neither a borrower, nor a lender be; for loan oft loses both it self and friend: a borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. this above all ; to thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man. farewel; my bleding season this in theet
laer.:
pol.: marry, well bethought! 'tis told me he hath very oft of late given private time to you; and you your self have of your audience been most free and bounteous. if it be so, as so 'tis put on me, and that in way of caution, i must tell you, you do not understand your self so clearly, as it behoves my daughter, and your honour. what is between you? give me up the truth.
pol.: ay, springes to catch woodcocks. i do know when the blood burns, how prodigal the foul lends the tongue vows. there blazes, oh my daughter, giving more light than heat, extinct in both, ev'n in their promise as it is a making, you muff not take for sre. from this time,be somewhat fcanter of your maiden presence, set your intreatments at a highter rate, than a command to parley. for lord hamlet, believe so much in him, that he is young; and with a larger t tether may he walk, than may be given you. in few, ophelia, do not believe his vows, for they are brokers, 'not of that die which their investments shew, but meer implorers of unholy suits, breathing like fantaised and pious bonds, the better to beguile. this is for all: i would nor, in plain terms, from this time forth, have you so slander any moment's leisure, as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet. look to't, i charge you; come your way.
ham.: angels and ministers of grace defend us! be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damn'd, bring with thee airs from heav'n, or blasts from hell, be thy k intents wicked or charitable, thou com'st in such a questionable shape, that i will speak to thee. i'll call thee hamlet, king, father, royal dane: oh! answer me, let me not burst in ignorance; but tell why thy canoniz'd bones hearsed in death, have burst their cearments ? why the sepulcher, wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd, hath ope'd his ponderous and marble jaws, to call thee up again ? what may this mean ? that thou dead coarse again in compleat steel revist'ft thus the glimpses of the moon, making night hideous ? and we fools of nature, so horridly to shake our disposition with thoughts beyond the reaches of our fouls. say, why is this ? wherefore ? what should we do?
ham.: my fate cries out, and makes each petty artery in this body as hardy as the nemean lion's nerve: still am i call'd ? unhand me, gentlemen gs by heav'n i'll make a ghost of him that lets me i say awaygo on i'll follow thee
ghost.: i and thee apt; and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed that rots it self in ease on lethe's wharf, wouldst thou not tir in this. now, hamlet, hear: 'tis given out, that sleeping in my orchard, a serpent stung me. the whole ear of denmark is by a forged process of my death rankly abus'd: but know, thou noble youth, the serpent that did sing thy father's life now wears his crown.
queen.: oh hamlet, what a falling off was there! from me, whose love was of that dignity, that it went hand in hand ev'n with the vow i made to her in marriage; and to decline upon a wretch, whose nat'ral gifts were poor to those of mine! but virtue, as it never will be mov’d, though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven; so lust, though to a radiant angel link'd, will fate it seif in a celestial bed, and prey on garbage but soft, methinks i scent the morning air brief let me be ; sleeping within mine orchard, my custom always in the afternoon, upon my secure hour thy uncle stole with juice of cursed hebenon in a viop, and in the porches of mine ears did pour the leperous distilment; whose effect holds such an enmity with blood of man, that swift as quicksilver it courses through the nat'ral gates and allies of the body; and with a sudden vigour it doth posset and curd, like eager droppings into milk, the thin and wholsome blood: so did it mine, and a mos instant tetter bark'd about, most lazarlike, with vile and loathsome crust all my smooth body. thus was i sleeping, by a brother's hand, of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatcht; cut off even in the blossoms of my sn, unhouzzled, unanointed, unanel’d; no reck'ning made, but sent to my account with all my imperfections on my head. oh horrible! oh horrible! most horrible! if thou hast nature in thee, bear it not; let not the royal bed of denmark be a couch for luxury and damned incest. but howsoever thou pursu'st this act, taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive against thy mother ought; leave her to heav’n, and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, to prick and sting her. fare thee well at ot once! the glowworm shews the matin to be near, and 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire. adieu, adieu, adieu; remember me.
ham.: oh all you holt of heav'n! oh earth! and shall i couple hell? oh hold my heart. and you my sinews, grow not instant old; but bear me stiffly up; remember thee ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a feat in this distracted globe; remember thee yea, from the table of my memory i'll wipe away all trivial fond records, all saws of books, all forms, all pressures pas, that youth and observation copied there; and thy commandment all alone shall live within the book and volume of my brain, unmixt with baser matter. yes, by heav'n: oh most pernicious woman! oh villain, villain, smiling damned villain ! my tables,  meet it is i set it down, that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain; at least i'm cure it may be co in denmark. so uncle, there you are ; now to my word; it is; adieu, adieu, remember me: i've sworn it
mar.: so be it. ior. illo, ho, ho, my
ham.: and therefore as a stranger give it welcome. there are more things in heav'n and earth, horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy. but come, here as before, never so help you mercy, (how strange or odd soe'er i bear my self, as i perchance hereafter shall think meet to put an antick disposition on) that you at such time feeing me, never shall with arms encumbred thus, or this head shake; or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase; as well we know or, we could, and if we would or, if we lift to speak  or, there be and if there might. or such ambiguous giving out to note, that you know ought of me; this do ye swear. so grace and mercy at your most need help you. swear.
pol.: marry, well said, very well caid. look you, sir, enquire me first what danskers are in parts; and how, and who, what means, and where they keep, what company, at what expence? and finding by this encompassment and drift of question, that they do know my son; come you more near5 then your particular demands will touch it, take you, as 'twere some distant knowledge of him, as thus  i know his father and his friends, and in part him  do you mark this, reynoldo?
pol.: and in part him but you may faynot well but if't be he i mean, he's very wild; addicted so and so . and there put on him what forgeries you please; marry, none so rank, as may dishonour him; take heed of that butbut, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual flips, as are companions noted and most known to youth and liberty.
pol.: faith no, as you may season it in the charge; you must not put another scandal on him, that he is open to incontinency, that's not my meaning; but breathe his faults so quaintly, that they may seem the taints of liberty, the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, a savageness in unreclaimed blood of general assault.
pol.: marry, sir, here's my drift, and i believe it is a fetch of wit. you laying these flight rallies on my son, as 'twere a thing a little foil'd i'th' working, mark you your party in converse; him you would found, having ever seen in the prenominate crimes, the youth you speak of guilty, be assur'd he closes with you in this consequence; good sir, or so, or friend, or gentleman, (according to the phrase or the addition, of man and country.)
pol.: at closes in the confequenceay marry, he closes thus. i know the gentleman, i saw him yesterday, or t'other day, or then, with such and such, and as you fay, there was he gaming, there o'ertook in's rowse, there falling out at tennis; or perchance, i saw him enter such a house of sale, videlicet, a brothel, or so forth see you now; your bait of falshood takes this carp of truth; and thus do we of wisdom and of reach, with windlaces, and with assays of byas, by indirections and directions out: so by my former lecture and advice shall you my ton , you have me, have you not?
oph.: alas my lord, i have been so affrighted! pol with what, in the name of heav'n ?
oph.: he took me by the wrist, and held me hard, then goes he to the length of all his arm; and with his other hand, thus o'er his brow, he falls to such perusal of my face, as he would draw it, long time staid he so; at last, a little h(aking of my arm, and thrice his head thus waving up and down,he rais'd a sigh, so piteous and profound, that it did seem to shatter all his bulk, and end his being. then he lets me go, and with his head over his shoulder turn'd, he seem'd to find his way without his eyes, for outadoors he went without their help, and to the last, bended their light on me.
pol.: come, go with me, i will go leek the
king.: this is the very ecstasie of love, whose violent property foredoes it self, and leads the will to desp'rate undertakings, as oft as any passion under heav'n, that do's afflict our natures. i am sorry; what, have you giv'n him any hard words of late?
pol.: that hath made him mad. i'mi'm sorry that with better heed and judgment i had not quoted him. ifear'd he trifl'd and meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealouse; it seems it is as proper to our age, to cast beyond our selves in our opinions, as it is common for the younger fort to lack discretion. come, go we to the
king.: this must be known, which being kept close, might move more grief to hide, than hate to utter love.
queen.: good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you, and fare i am, two men there are not living, to whom he more adheres. if it will please you to thew us so much gentry and good will, as to extend your time with us a while, for the supply and prost of our hope, your visitation shall receive such thanks as sts a king's remembrance.
queen.: amen. enter polonius.
pol.: have i, my lord ? assure you, my good liege, i hold my duty, as i hold my foul, both to my god, and to my gracious king; and i do think (or else this brain of mine huntshunts not the trail of policy, so sure as i have us'd to do) that i have found the very cause of hamlet's lunacy.
king.: thy self do grace to them, and bring them in. [ex.
pol.: he tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath found the head and scource of all your ion's distemper.
volt.: most fair return of greetings, and desires. upon our first, he sent out to suppress his nephew's levies, which to him appear'd to be a preparation 'gains the polack: but better lookt into, he truly found it was against your highness. whereat griev'd, that so his sickness, age, and impotence was falsely born in hand, sends out arrests on forti,'ras; which he, in brief, obeys, receives rebuke from norway; and in fine, makes vow before his uncle, never more to give th’ assay of arms against your majesty. whereon old norway, overcome with joy, gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, and hi commission to employ those soldiers, so levied as before, against the polack: withwith an entreaty herein further shewn, that it might please you to give quiet pass through your dominions for this enterprize on such regards of safety and allowance, as therein are set down.
pol.: this business is well ended. my liege and madam, to expostulate what majesty should be, what duty is, why day is day, night night, and time is time,were nothing but to waste night, day, and time. therefore, since brevity's the soul of wit, and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes. i will be brief; your noble son is mad. mad call i it; for to define true madness, what is't, but to be nothing else but mad. but let that go.
pol.: madam, i swear i are no art at all: that he is mad 'tis true; 'tis true, ‘tis pity; and pity, it is true; a foolish figure, but farewel it, for i will use no art. mad let us grant him then; and now remains that we find out the cause of this effect, or rather fay, the cause of this defect; for this effect defective, comes by cause, thus it remains, and the remainder thus  perpend  i have a daughter; have, whilst he is mine, who in her duty and obedience, mark, hath giv'n me this; now gather, and furmile. to the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified ophelia. that's an ill phrase, a vile phrase, beautified is a vile phrase; but you shall hear , theft to her excellent white besom, these
pol.: good madam flay a while, i will be faithful. doubt thou, the stars are fire, doubt, that the sun doth move ; doubt truth to be a lar, but never doubt, i love. oh dear ophelia, i am ill at thee numbers; i have not art to reckon my groans; but that i love thee best, oh most best, believe it. adieu. thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, hamlet this in obedience hath my daughter shewn me: and more above, hath his sollicitings, as they fell out by time, by means, and place, all given to mine ear.
pol.: i would fain prove so. but what might you think ? when i had seen his hot love on the wing, (as i perceiv'd it, i must tell you that before my daughter told me,) what might you, or my dear majesty your queen here, think? if i had play'd the desk or tablebook, or given my heart working, mute and dumb, or look'd upon this love with idle sight, what might you think ? no, i went round to work,and my young mistress thus i did bespeak; lord hamlet is a prince out of thy sphere, this must not be; and then, i precepts gave her, that the should lock her self from his resort, admit no messengers, receive no tokens: which done, the took the fruits of my advice, and he repulsed, a short tale to make, fell to a sadness, then into a fast, thence to a watching, thence into a weakness, thence to a lightness, and by this declension unto the madness wherein now he raves, and all we wail
pol.: at such a time i'll loose my daughter to him, be you and i behind an arras then, mark the encounter: if he love her not, and be not from his reason fain thereon, let me be no assistant for a state, and keep a farm and carters.
pol.: how say you by that ? still harping on my daughter  yet he knew me not at first; he said i was a fishmonger. he is far gone, and truly in my youth, i suffered much extremity for love; very near this. i'll speak to him again. what do you read, my'lord ?
ham.: that you must teach me; but let me conjure you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our everpreferved love, and by what more dear, a better proposer could charge you withal; be even and di rect with me, whether you were sent for or no ?
ham.: i will tell you why, so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. i have of late, but wherefore i know not, loft all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercise; and indeed, it goesso heavily with my disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a steril promontory; this most excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging fimament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me, than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. what a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in fa culties! in form and moving how express and admirable! in action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! and yet to me, what is this quintessence of dust ? man delights not me; nor woman neither, tho' by your smiling you seem to say so.
ham.: he that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty shall have tribute of me;, the adventurous knight shall use his foyle and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall end his part in peace; and the lady shall fay her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for't. what players are they ?
ham.: what, are they children ? who maintains 'em ? how are they escoted? will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing ? will they not fay afterwards, if they should grow them selves to common players ? as it is most like, if their means are no better: their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession.
ham.: it is not strange; for mine uncle is king of denmark, and those that would make mowes at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducates apeice, for his picture in little. there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.
ham.: gentlemen, you are welcome to elsnoor; your hands: come then, the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremo ny. let me comply with you in this garbe, left my extent to the players (which i tell you muff thew fairly outward) should more appear like entertainment than yours. you are welcome; but my unclefather and auntmother are deceiv'd.
pol.: the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, come dy, history, pastoral, pastoralcomical, historicalpastoral, scene undividable, or poem unlimited. seneca cannot be too heavy, nor plautus too light, for the law of wit, and the liberty. these are the only men.
pol.:
ham.: why as by lot, god wotand then you know, it came to pass, as mos like it was; the srs row of the t rubrick will shew you more. for look where my abridgements come. y'are welcome masters, welcome
ham.: i heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted: or if it was, not above once, for the play i remember pleas'd not the million, 'twas caviar to the general; but it was,(as i receiv'd it, and others, whose judgment in such matters, cry ed in the top of mine) an excellent play; well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. i remember one said, there was no d salts in the lines, to make the matter savoury; nor no matter in the phrase, that might indite the au thor of affection; but call'd it, an honest method. one speech in it i chiefly lov'd; 'twas aeneas' tale to dido, and thereabout ofit especially, where he speaks of priam's slaughter. if it live inyour memory, begin at this line, let me fee, let me seethe rugged pyrrhus, like th' hyrcanian beast. it is not so  it be gins with pyrrhus. the rugged pyrrhus, he whose sable arms black as his purpose, did the night resemble when he lay couched in the ominous horse;hath now his dread and black complexion fmear'd with heraldry more dismal; head to foot now is he total geules; horridly trickt with blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, bak'd and impasted with the parching fires, that lend a tyrannous and damned light to murthers vile. roasted in wrath and fire, and thus o'ercifed with coagulate gore, with eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhus old granfire priam seeks.
play.: run barefoot up. up and down, threatening the flameswith bisson rheum; a clout upon that head, where late the diadem sod4, and for a robe about her lank and all q'erteemed loyns, a blanket in th' alarm of fear caught up. who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd, 'gainst fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd: but if the gods themselves did see her then, when the saw pyrrhus make malicious sport in mincing with his sword her husband's limbs; the instant burst of clamour that she made,(unless things mortal move them not at all) would have made g melt the burning eyes of heav'n, and passion in the gods.
ham.: ay so, god b' w' ye: now i am alone. oh what a rogue and peasant slave am i ? is it not monstrous that this player here, but in a s&ion, in a dream of passion, could force his foul so to his own conceit, that from her working, all his visage warm'd: tears in his eyes, diftra&ion in his aspect, a broken voice, and his whole function suiting with forms, to his conceit? and all for nothing ? for hecuba? what's hecuba to him, or he to hecuba, that he should weep for her ? what would he do, had he the motive and the cue for passion that i have? he would drown the stage with tears, and cleave the gen'ral ear with horrid speech, make mad the guilty, and appall the free, confound the ign'rant, and amaze indeed the very faculty of eyes and ears. yet i fay nothing; no, not for a king, upon whole property and most dear life a damn'd defeat was made. am i a coward ? who calls me villain, breaks my pate across, plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face? tweaks me by th' nose, gives me the lye i'th' throat, as deep as to the lungs? who does me this?yet i should take it  for it cannot be, but i am pigeonliver'd, and lack gall to make oppression bitter; or ere this, i should have fatted all the region kites with this slave's offal. bloody, bawdy villain ! remorseless, treacherous, letcherous, kindless villain. why what an ass am i . this is most brave, that i, the son of a dear father murthered, prompted to my revenge by heav'n and hell, _ mus, like a whore, unpack my heart with words, and fall a cursing like a very drab a stallion! fye upon't! soh! about my brain i've heard, that guilty creatures, at a play, have by the very cunning of the scene been struck so to the foul, that presently they have proclaim'd their malefactions. for murther, though it have no tongue, will speak with most miraculous organ. i'll observe his looks, play something like the murther of my father, before mine uncle. i'll observe his looks, i'll tent him to the quick; if he but blench, i know my course. the spirit that i have seen may be the devil, and the devil hath power t'assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps out of my weakness and my melancholy, (as he is very potent with such spirits) abuses me to damn me. i'll have grounds more relative than this: the play's the thing, wherein i'll catch the conscience of the
king.: and can you by no drift of conference get from him why he puts on this b confusion, a grating so hardily all his days of quiet, with turbulent and dang'rous lunacy ? rof he does confess he feels himself distracted; but from what cause he will by no means speak. guid. nor do we find him forward to be founded; but with a crafty madness keeps aloof, when we would bring him on to some confession of his true slate.
king.: sweet gertrude, leave us too, for we have closely sent for hamlet hither, that he, as 'twere by accident, may here affront ophelia. her father, and; my self, will so bestow our selves, that seeing unseen we may of their encounter frankly judge, and gather by him, as he is behaved, if’t be th' affliction of his love, or no, that thus he suffers
king.: oh 'tis too true, how smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!the harlot's cheek beautied with plastring art is not more ugly to ,the thingthat helps it, than is my deed to my most painted word. oh heavy burthen!
ham.: to be, or not to be? that is the question whether 'tis nobler in.the mind, to suffer the flings and arrows of outragious fortune; or to take arms against a sea of troubles, and by opposing end them ?.to die, to sleep no more; and by a sleep to fay we end the heartache and the thousand natural. hocks that flesh is heir to; 'tis a consummation devoutly to be wish'd. to die  to sleep  to sleep? perchance to dream; ay, there's the rub for in that sleep of death what dreams may come, when we have shuffled off this mortal coil, must give us pause. there's the refpe~c that makes calamity of so long life. for who would bear the whips and scorns of time, th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, the pang of defpis'd love, the law's delay, the insolence of office, and the spurns that patient merit of th' unworthy takes; when he himself might his quietus make with a bare bodkin ? who would fardles bear, to groan and sweat under a weary life? but that the dread of something after death, (that undiscover'd country, from whole bourne no traveller returns) puzzles the will, and makes us rather bear those ills we have, than fly to others that we know not of. thus conscience does make cowards of us all: and thus the native hue of resolution is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought; and enterprizes of great pith and moment, with this regard, their currents turn d awry and lose the name of a&dion.  soft you now, the fair ophelia ? nymph, in thy oraisons be all my sins remembred.
ham.: get thee to a nunnery. why wouldst thou be a bree der of sinners ? i am my felt indifferent honest, but yet i could accuse me of such things, that it were better my mother had not born me. i am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck, than i have thoughts to put them in, ima gination to give them shape, or time to act them in. what should such fellows' as i do crawling between heav'n and earth ? we are arrant knaves, believe none of us  go thy ways to a nunnery  where's your father ?
king.: it shall be so: madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go, hamn. speak the speech i pray you, as i pronounc'd it to you, trippingly on the tongue. but if you mouth it, as many of our players do, i had as lieve the towncrier had spoke my lines. and do not saw the air too much with your hand thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as i may fay, whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. oh, it offends me to the foul, to hear a robustous periwigpated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings: who (for the most part) are capable of nothing, but inexplicable dumb thews, and noise: i could have such a fel low whipt for o'erdoing termagant; it outherods herod. pray you avoid it.
ham.: oh reform it altogether. and let those that play your clowns, speak no more than is set down for them: for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time. some necessary question of the play be then to be considered: that's villanous, and thews a mos pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. go make you ready. how now, my lord? will the king hear this piece of work ?
ham.: no, nor mine now, my
lord.: you plaid once i'th' university, you fay ?
ham.: it was a brute part of him, to kill so capital a calf there. be the players ready?
ros.: ay, my lord, they fray upon your patience.
ham.: marry this is miching mlalicho, that means mischief.
oph.: belike this shew imports the argument of the play ?
ham.: we shall know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel, they'll tell
all.:
oph.: will he tell us what this shew meant ?
ham.: ay, or any shew that you'll shew him. be not you ashamed to shew, he'll not thame to tell you what it means.
oph.: you are naught, you are naught, i'll mark the
play.: enter prologue. for us, and for our tragedy, here stooping to your clemency, we beg your hearing patiently.
ham.: is this a prologue, or the pose of a ring ?
oph.: 'tis brief, my
ham.: as woman's love.
king.: i do believe you think what now you speak; but what we do determine, oft we break: purpose is but the slave to memory, of violent birth, but poor validity: which now, like fruits unripe, sticks on the tree, but fall unshaken, when they mellow be. most necessary 'tis that we forget, to pay our selves what to our selves is debt: what to our selves in passion we propose, the passion ending, doth the purpose lose; the violence of either grief or joy, their own enactors with themselves destroy: where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; grief joys, joy grieves on slender accident. this world is nor for aye, and 'tis not strange that ev'n our loves should with our fortunes change. for 'tis a question left us yet to prove, whether love fortune lead, or fortune love. the great man down, you mark his fav'rite flies; the poor, advanc'd, makes friends of enemies: and hitherto doth love on fortune tend, for who not needs, shall never lack a friend; and who in want a hollow friend doth try, directly seasons him his enemy. but orderly to end where i begun, our wills and fates do so contrary run, that our devices still are overthrown, our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own. so think thou wilt no second husband wed, but die thy thoughts, when thy srs lord is dead.
ham.: the mousetrap. marry how ? topically. this play is the image of a murther done in vienna; gonzago is the duke's name, his wife baptista; you shall see anon, 'tis a knavish piece of work; but what o' that your majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not; let the gall'd jade winch, our withers are unwrung. this is one lucianus, nephew to the
ham.: so you must take your husbands. begin murtherer. leave thy damnable faces, and begin. come, the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge. luc. thoughts black, hands apt, drugs st, and time agreeing: confederate season, else no creature seeing: thou mixture rank, of midnightweeds collected, with hecate's bane, thrice blasted, thrice infected, thou natural magick, and dire property, on wholsome life usurp immediately.
ham.: why look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me; you would play upon me, you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck out the heart of my mystery, you would found me from my lowers note, to the top of my compass; and there is much musick, excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. why do you think that i am easier to be plaid on than a pipe? call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me. god bless you, sir.
ham.: then will i come to my mother by and by; they fool me to the top of my bent. i will come by and by. leave me friends. i will say so. by and by is easily said. 'tis now the very witching time of night, when churchyards yawn, and hell it self breaths out contagion to this world. now could i drink hot blood, and do such bitter business as the day would quake to look on. soft, now to my mother oh heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever the foul of nero enter this firm bosom; let me be cruel, not unnatural; i will speak daggers to her, but use none. my tongue and foul in this be hypocrites!
king.: i like him not, nor stands it safe with us to let his madness rage. therefore prepare you;i your commission will forthwith dispatch, and he to england shall along with you. the terms of our estate may not endure hazard to near us, as doth hourly grow out of his lunacies. guild. we will provide our selves; most holy and religious fear it is, to keep those many bodies safe, that live and feed upon your majesty.
pol.: my lord, he's going to his mother's closet; behind the arras i'll convey my self to hear the process. i'll warrant she'll tax him home. and as you said, and wifely was it said, 'tis meet that some more audience than a mother, (since nature makes them partial,) should o'erhear the speech of vantage. fare you well my liege, i'll call upon you ere you go to bed, and tell you what i know.
lord.: oh my offence is rank, it smells to heav'n,it hath the primal eldest curse upon't; 'a brother's murther. pray i cannot,though inclination be as sharp as will:my stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, and like a man to double business bound, i stand in pause where i shall first begin, and both negle&. what if this cursed hand were thicker than it self with brother's blood? is there not rain enough in the sweet heav'ns to wash it white as snow ? whereto serves mercy, but to confront the visage of offence?and what's in prayer, but this twofold force, to be forestalled ere we come to fall,or pardon'd being down? then i'll look up. my fault is pass. but oh what form of prayer can serve my turn ; forgive me my foul marther! that cannot be, since i am till possest' of those effe&s for which i did the murther, my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen, may one be pardon'd, and retain th' offence? in the corrupted currents of this world,offence's gilded hand may shove by justice; and oft 'tis seen, the wicked prize it selfbuys out the law; but 'tis not so above: there is no shuffling, there the action lies in his true nature, we our selves compell'd ev'n to the teeth and forehead of our faults, to give in evidence. what then? what rests? try what repentance can. what can it not? yet what can it, when one cannot repent? oh wretched slate! oh bosom, black as death! oh limed foul, that struggling to be free, art more engag'd! help angels, make assay! bow stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel be soft as sinews of the newborn babe! all may be well.
ham.: now might i do it pat, now he is praying, and now i'll do't and so he goes to heav'n, and so am i reveng'd ? that would be scann'd, a villain kills my father, and for that i, his sole son, do this fame villain fend to heav'n o this is hire and fallery, not revenge. he took my father grosly, full of bread, with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may and how his audit sands, who knows, save heav'n? but in our circumstance and course of thought, 'tis heavy with him. am i then reveng'd, to take him in the purging of his soul, when he is st and feafon'd for his passage? up sword, and know thou a more horrid r time: when he is drunk, asleep, or in his rage, or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed, at gaming, swearing, or about come a& that has no relish of salvation in't, then trip him, that his heels may kick at heav'n, and that his foul may be as damn'd and black as hell, whereto it goes. my mother slays; this physick but prolongs thy sickly days.
ham.: ay lady, 'twas my word. thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewel, i took thee for thy better; take thy fortune; thou find'st, to be too busie, is some danger. leave wringing of your hands, peace, st you down, and let me wring your heart, for so i ihall if it be made of penetrable stuff; if damned custom have not braz'd it so, that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
ham.: such an act,that blurs the grace and blush of modesty, calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose from the fair forehead of an innocent love, and lets a blister there; makes marriagevows as false as dicers oaths. 0 such a deed, as from the body of contraction plucks the very foul, mnd sweet religion makes a rhapsody 9f wr ds. heav'n's face doth glow o'er this solidity and compound maf6, with tristful visage as against the doom. 'tis thoughtsick at the act.
ham.: look here upon this picture, and on this, the counterfeit presentment of two brothers: see what a grace wa seated in this bow, hyperion's curles, the front of jove himself, an eye like mars, to threaten or command, a station iike the herald mercury newlighted on aheav’nkissing hill; a combination, and a form indeed, where every god did seem to set his seal, to give the world assurance of a man.this was your husband . look you now what follows, here is your husband, like a mildew’d ear,blasting his wholesome brother. have you eyes could you on this fair mountain leave to feed, and batten on this moore? ha! have you eyes? you cannot call it love; for at your age, the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,and waits upon the judgment; and what judgmentwould step from this to this: what devil was?, that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman blind ? o shame! where is thy blush? rebellions hell if thou canst mutiny in a matron' bones, to flaming youth let virtue be as wax, and melt in her own fire. proclaim no shame, when the compulsive ardour gives the charge, since frost it self as actively doth burn, and reason pardons will.
ghost.: do not forget: this visitation is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose. but look! amazement on thy mother fits; o step between her and her fighting soul: conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.speak to her hamlet.
ham.: what ecstasie? my pulse, as yours, doth temp'rately keep time, and makes as healthful musick. 'tis not madness that i have utter'd; bring me to the test and i the matter will reword; which madness would gamboll from. mother, for love of grace, lay not that flattering unction to your foul, that not your trespass, but my madness speaks: it will 'but skin and film the ulcerous place, whilst rank corruption running all within, insects unseen. confers your self to heav'n, repent what's pail, avoid what is to come, and do not spread the compost on the weeds to make them ranker. forgive this my virtue, for in the fatness of there purse times; virtue it self of vice must pardon beg, yea, curb, and wooe, for leave to do it good.
ham.: o throw away the worser part of it, and live the purer with the other half. good night; but go not to mine uncle's bed. assume a virtue, if you have it not. that monster custom, who all sense doth eat, of habit's devil, is angel yet in this; that to the use of actions fair and good, he likewise gives a frock or livery that aptly is put on: refrain tonight, and that shall lend a kind of easiness to the next abstinence; the next more ease; for use can almost change the stamp of nature, and mailer ev'n the devil, or throw him ouc with wondrous potency. once more, good night! and when you are desirous to be blest, i'll blessing beg of you. for this same lord, i do repent: hut heav'n hath pleas'd it so, to punish me with this, and this with me, that i muf be their scourge and minister. i will bestow him, and will answer well the death i gave him; so again, good night. i must be cruel, only to be kind ; thus bad begins, and worse remains behind. .
ham.: not this by no means that i bid you do.let the fond king tempt you again to ,bed, pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse, and let him for a pair of reechy kisses, or padling in your neck with his damn’d fingers, make you to ravel all this matter out, that i essentially am not in madness, but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know. for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wife, would from a' paddock, from a,bat, a gibbe, such dear concernings hide? who would do so? no, in despight of sense and secrecy, unpeg the basket on the bpufe&s top, let the birds fly, and like the famous ape to try conclusions; in the basket creep, and break your own neck down.
ham.: there's letters seal'd, and my two fchoolfellows, (whom i will trust as i will adders fang'd,) they bear the mandate; they must sweep my way and marshal me to knavery: let it work for 'tis the sport to have the engineer hoi f with his own petar: an't shall go hard but i will delve one yard below their mines, and blow them at the moon, o 'tis most sweet when in one line two crafts directly meet! this man shall set me packing; i'll lug the guts into the neighbour room; mother, good night. indeed this counsellor is now most still, most secret, and most grave, who was in life a foolish prating knave. come, sir, to draw toward an end with you. good night, mother.
king.: oh heavy deed! it had been so with us, had we been there: his liberty is full of threats to all, to you your seif, to us, to every one. alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd ? it will be laid to us, whose providence should have kept short, reftrain'd, and out of haunt this mad young man. but so much was our love, we would not understand what was most st . but like the owner of a foul disease, to keep it from divulging, lets it feed ev'n on the pith of life. where; is he gone?
king.: oh gertrude, come away: the fun no sooner shall the mountains touch, but we will ship him hence and this vile deed we must, with all our majesty and skill, both countenance, and excuse. ho! guildenstern friends both, go join you with some further aid : hamlet in madness hath polonius slain, and from his mother's closet hath he drag'd him. go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body into the chappel. pray you haste in this. and let them know both what we mean to do, and what's untimely done. oh come away,my soul is full of discord and dismay.
ros.: without, my lord, guarded to know your pleasure.
ham.: not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certain convocation of politique worms are at him. your worm is your only emperor for diet. we fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat our selves for maggots. your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service, two dishes to one ta ble, that's the end.
ham.: two thousand fouls, and twenty thousand ducats will not debate the question of this straw; this is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace that inward breaks, and shews no cause without why the man dies. i humbly thank you, sir.
ham.: i'll be with you, go a little before. how all occasions do inform against me,and spur my dull revenge? what is man,if his chief good and market of his timebe but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more. sure he that made us with such large discourse, looking before and after, gave us not that capability and godlike reason to rust in us unus"di now whether it be bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple of thinking too precisely on th' event, (a thought which quarter'd hath but one part wisdom, and ever three parts coward:) i do not know why yet i live to fay this thing's to do, sith i have cause, and will, and strength, and means to do't. examples grots as earth exhort me; witness this army of such mali and charge, led by a delicate and tender prince, whose spirit with divine ambition puft makes mouths at the invisible event, exposing what is mortal and unsure to all that fortune, death, and danger dare, ev'n for an eggshell. 'tis not to be great, never to stir without great argument; but greatly to and quarrel in a straw, when honour's at the stake. how stand i then,, that have a father kill'd, a mother ftain'd, (excitements of my reason and my blood)' and let all sleep, while to my shame i see the imminent death of twenty thousand men, that for a fantasie and trick of fame go to their graves like beds; fight for a spot whereon the numbers cannot try the cause, which is not tomb enough and continent to hide the slain? o then from this time forth, my thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth.
gent.: she speaks much of her father; says she hears there's tricks i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart, spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt that carry but half sense: her speech is nothing, yet the unshaped use of it doth move the hearers to collection ; they aim at it, and botch the words up st to their own thoughts, which as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them, indeed would make one think there might be thought; though nothing cure, yet much unhappily.
oph.: indeed? without an oath, i'll make an end on't.by gis, and by s. charity; alack, and fie for shame, young men will do't, if they come to't, by cock they are to blame quoth she, before you tumbled me, you promis'd me to wed: so would i ha' done, by yonder fun, and thou hadst not come to my bed.
oph.: i hope all will be well. we must be patient, but i cannot chute but weep, to think they should lay him i'th' cold ground ; my brother shall know of it, and so i thank you for your good' counsel. come, my coach; goodnight, ladies;, goodnight,. sweet ladies; goodnight, goodnight.
king.: follow her close, give her good watch, i pray you; this is the poison of deep grief, it springs all from her father's death. o gertrude, gertrude! when sorrows come, they come not single spies, but in battalions. srs, her father slain, next your son gone, and he most violent author of his own just remove; the people muddied, thick and unwholsome in their thoughts and whispers. for good polonius’ death. we've done but greenly, in private to inter him; poor ptbelia divided from her self, and her fair judgment, (without the which we're pictures, or mere beasts:) last, and as much containing as all these, her brother is in secret come from france,  feeds on this wonder, keeps himself in clouds, and wants not buzzers to infect his ear with pestilent speeches of his father's death;wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd, will nothing stick our persons to arraign in ear and ear. o my dear gertrude, this, like to a murdering piece in many places, gives me superstitious death!
mes.: save your self, my
king.: what is the cause, laertes, that thy rebellion looks so giantlike ? let him go, gertrude; do not fear our person : there's such divinity doth hedge a king that treason can but peep to what it would, a&ts little of its will. tell me, laertes, why are you thus incenst : let him go, gertrude. speak man.
laer.: how came he dead? i'll not be juggled with. to hell, allegiance! vows, to the black devil! conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit ; i dare damnation; to this point i stand, that both the worlds i give to negligence, let come what comes only i'll be reveng'd most throughly for my father.
king.: why now you speak . like a good child, and a true gentleman. that i am guiltless of;your father's death, and am most sensibly in grief for it, it shall as level to your judgment pierce, as day does to your eye.
laer.: let her come in. how now? what noise is that? o heat dry up my brains, tears seven times salt burn on the sense and vertue of mine eye. by heav'n, thy madness shall be paid with weight, 'till our scale turn the beam. o rose of may! dear maid, kind lifter, sweet ophelia! o heav'ns, is't possible a young maid's wits should be as mortal as an old man's life ? c nature is fine in love, and where ‘tis fine, it sends some precious instance of it seif after the thing it loves.
laer.: let this be so. his means of death, his obscure funeral; no trophy sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones, no noble rite, nor formal ostentation; cry to be heard, as 'twere from heav'n to earth, that i mult call in question.
king.: two special reasons, which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew'd, and yet to me are strong. the queen, his mother, lives almost by his looks; and for my self, my virtue or my plague, be't either which, she's so conjunctive to my life and foul ; that as the star moves not bat in his sphere, i could not but by her. the other motive, why to a publick count i might not go, is the great love the general gender hear him; who dipping all his faults in their affection, would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone, convert his gyves to graces. so my arrows too slightly timbred for so loud a wind, would have reverted to my bow again, and not where i had aim'd them.
king.: from hamlet? who brought them ?
king.: to thine own peace: if he be now return'd, as liking not his voyage, and that he means no more to undertake it; i will work him to an exploit now ripe in my devise, under the which he shall not chuse but fall: and for his death no wind of blame shall breathe, but ev'n his mother shall uncharge the practice, and call it accident.
king.: a very feather in the cap of youth, yet needful too, for youth no less becomes the light and careless livery that it wears, than fettled age his fables, and his weeds, importing health and graveness. two months since here was a gentleman of normandy; i've seen my self and serv'd against the french, and they can well on horseback; but this gallant had witchcraft in't, he grew unto his feat; and to such wondrous doing brought his horse, as he had been iocorps'd and demynatur'd with the brave beast; so far he past my thought, that i in forgery of shapes and tricks, come short of what he did.
king.: he made confession of you, and gave you such a masterly report, for art and exercise in your defence; and for your rapier most especial, that he cry'd out, 'twould be a fight indeed, if one could match you. this report of his did hamlet so envenom with his envy, that he could nothing do, but wish and beg your sudden coming o'er to play with him. now out of this .
king.: let's further think of this, weigh what convenience both of time and meansmay fit us to our shape. if this should fail, and that our drift look through our bad performance, 'twere better not assay'd; therefore this project should have a back, or second, that might hold, if this should blast in proof. softlet me fee. we'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings, i ha't  when in your motion you are hot, and make your bouts more violent to th' end, and that he calls for drink; i'll have prepar'd him a chalice for the nonce; whereon but tipping,if he by chance escape your venom'd tuck, our purpose may hold there. how now, sweet queen?
queen.: there is a willow grows aslant a brook, that shews his hoar leaves in the glassie stream: there with fantastick garlands did she come, of crowflow'rs, nettles, daisies, and long purples that liberal shepherds give a grosser name, but our cold maids do dead mens fingers call them. there on the pendant boughs, her coronet weeds clambring to hang, an envious sliver broke; when down her weedy trophies and her self fell in the weeping brook; her cloaths spread wide, and mermaidlike, a while they bore her up; which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes, as one incapable of her own distress, or like a creature native, and indewed unto that element: but long it could not be, 'till that her garments, heavy with their drink, pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay to muddy death.
1 clown.: it must be se offendendo, it cannot be else. for here lyes the point; if i drown my selfwittingly, it argues an a6t, and an act hath three branches. it is an act to do, and to perform; argal, she drown'd her seif wittingly.
1 clown.: i like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows does well; but how does it well ? it does well to those that do ill: now thou 'dost ill to fay the gallows is built stronger than the church; argal, the gallows may do well to thee. to't again, come.
ham.: 'tis e'en so; the hand of little imployment hath the daintier sense.
clown.: but age with his stealing steps, hath claw'd me in his clutch: and hath shipped me into the land, as if i ne'er had been such.
ham.: why e'en so: and now my lady worm's, chopless, and knockt about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. here's fine revolution, if we had the trick to see't. did these bones cost nomore the breeding, but to play at loggers with 'em? mine ake to think on't.
clown.: a pickaxe and a spade, a spade, for and, a shrowding sheet! o, a pit of clay, for to be made for such a guest is meet.
ham.: how abso;ute the knave is? we must speak by the card,or equivocation will follow us. by the lord, horatio, thesethree years i have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked,that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of our courtier,he galls his kibe. how long hast thou been a gravemaker?
clown.: why sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while. and your water is a fore de cayer of your whorson dead body. here's a scull now has lain in the earth three and twenty years.
ham.: alas poor yorick. i knew him, horatio, a fellow of in finite jest; of most excellent fancy: he hath born me on his back a thousand times: and now how abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rises at it. here hung those lips that i have kiss'di know not how oft. where be your gibes now ? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to set the table in a roar ? not one now, to mock your own grinning? quite chopfallen? now get youto my lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favour she muff come; make her laugh at that pr'ythee, horatio, tell me one thing.
priest.: her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd as we have warranty; her death was doubtful, and but that great command o'ersways the order, she should in ground unsantified have lodg'd 'till the las trump. for charitable prayers, shards, flints, and pebbles, should be thrown on her; yet here she is allow'd her virgin rites, her maiden strewments, and the bringing home of bell and burial.
king.: this is mere madness; and thus a while the fit will work on him:anon as patient as the female dove, when that her golden cuplets are difclos'd, his silence will sit drooping.
ham.: up from my cabin, my seagown scarst about me, in the dark grop'd i to find out them; had my desire, finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew to mine own room again, making so bold (my fears forgetting manners) to unseal their grand commission, where i found, horatio, a royal knavery; an exact command, larded with many several forts of reasons, importing denmark's health, and england's too, (with ho! such buggs and goblings in my life,) that on the supervize, no leisure bated, no not to stay the grinding of the ax, my head should be struck off.
play.: i fate me down, devis'd a new commission, wrote it fair: (i once did hold it as our statists do, a baseness to write fair; and labour'd much how to forget that learning; but, sir, now it did me yeoman's service) wilt thou know th' effect of what i wrote?
ham.: why ev'n in that was heaven ordinate; i had my father's signet in my purse, which was the model of that danhi seal: i folded the writ up in form of th' other, subscrib'd it, gave th' impression, plac'd it safely; the change was never known: now, the next day. was our [easght, and what to this was sequent, thou know'st already.
hor.: so, guildenstern and rosincrosse go to't. doth by their own insinuation grow: 'tis dangerous when baser nature comes between the pass, and fell incensed points of mighty opposites.
ham.: it will be thort.the interim's mine, and a man's lifes no more than to say, one. but i am very sorry, good horatio, that to laertes i forgot my self; for by the image of my cause i see the pourtraiture of his.; i'll court his favours: but fare the bravery of his grief did put me into a towring passion.
ham.: how if i answer no? oftr. i mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in tryal.
ham.: he did so with his dug before he suck'd it: thus has he (and many more of the fame breed that i know the drossy age dotes on) only got the tune of the time, and outward habit of en counter, a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the mos[ fond: and winnowed opinions,, and..do but blow them to their tryals, the bubbles are out.
lord.: my lord, his majesty commended bikh to you by young osrick, who brings back to him, ,that you attend him in the hall; he sends to know if your pleasure. hold to play with laertes, or that you will take longer time?
ham.: give me bur pardon, sir, i've done you wrong, but pardon't, as you are a gentleman. this presence knows, and you must needs have heard how i am punished with sore distraction. what i have done that might your nature, honour, and exception roughly awake, i here proclaim was madness: was't hamlet wrong'd laertes ? never hamlet. if hamlet from himself be ta'en away, and when he's not himself, do's wrong laertes; then hamlet do's it not; hamlet denies it: who does it then ? his madness. if't be so, hamlet is of the fashion that is wrong'd, his madness is poor hamlet's enemy. let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil, free me so far in your most generous thoughts, that i have shot mine arrow o'er the house, and hurt my brother.
laer.: i am satisfied in nature, whose motive, in this case, should stir me most to my revenge: but in my terms of honour, i stand aloof, and will no reconcilement; 'till by some elder masters of known honour i have a voice, and president of peace to keep my name ungor'd. but 'rill that time, i do receive your offer'd love like love, and will not wrong it.
ham.: one––
osr.: a hit, a very palpable hit.
laer.: well again
laer.: say you so? come on.
osr.: nothing neither way.
ham.: nay, come again.
osr.: look to the queen there, ho
osr.: how is't laertes?
amb.: the fight is dismal, and our affairs from england come too late: the ears are senseless that should, give us hearing to tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd, that rosincrosse and guildenstern are dead: where should we have our thanks ?
hor.: not from his mouth, had it th' ability of life to thank you: he never gave command'ment for their death. but since so full upon this bloody question, you from the polack wars, and you from england are here arrriv'd; give order that these bodies high on a stage be placed to the view,and let me speak to th' yet unknowing world, how these things came about. so shalt yot.hear of cruel, bloody, and unnatural: as, ofof accidental judgments, casual slaughters, of deaths put on by cunning, and forc'd cause, and in this upshot, purposes mistook, fall'n on th' inventors heads. all this can i truly deliver.
hor.: of that i shall have also cause to speak, and from his mouth whole voice will draw no more: but let this fame be presently perform'd, ev'n while men minds are wild, left more mischance on plots and errors happen.
fort.: let four captains bear hamlet like a soldier off the stage, for he was likely, had he been put on, to have prov'd most royally. and for his passage, the soldiers musick, and the rites of war speak loudly for him take up the body: such a fight as this, becomes the seld, but here shews much amiss. go, bid the soldiers shoot.
hor.: that can i,at least the whisper goes so. our last king,whose image even but now appear'd to us,was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway,(thereto prick't on by a most emulate pride)dar'd to the fight. in which, our valiant hamlet,(for so this side of our known world esteem'd him)did slay this fortinbras: who by seal'd compact,well ratified by law and heraldry,did forfeit (with his life) all those his landswhich he stood seiz'd of to the conqueror:against the which, a moiety competentwas gaged by our king; which had returnto the inheritance of fortinbras,had he been vanquisher, as by that covenantand carriage of the articles design'd,his fell to hamlet. now young fortinbras,of unimproved mettle hot and full,hath in the skirts of norway, here and there,shark'd up a list of landless resolutes,for food and diet, to some enterprizethat hath a stomach in't: which is no other,and it doth well appear unto our state,but to recover of us by strong handand terms compulsative, those foresaid landsso by his father lost: and this, i take it,is the main motive of our preparations,the source of this our watch, and the chief headof this posthaste and romage in the land.
ber.: 'tis here ________
hor.: 'tis here ________
mar.: it faded on the crowing of the cock.some say, that ever 'gainst that season comeswherein our saviour's birth is celebrated,the bird of dawning singeth all night long:and then, they say, no spirit walks abroad,the nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,no fairy takes, no witch hath power to charm;so hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
king.: though yet of hamlet our dear brother's deaththe memory be green; and that it fittedto bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdomto be contracted in one brow of woe;yet so far hath discretion fought with nature,that we with wisest sorrow think on him,together with remembrance of our selves.therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,th' imperial jointress of this warlike state,have we, as 'twere, with a defeated joy,with one auspicious, and one dropping eye,with mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage;in equal scale weighing delight and dole,taken to wife. nor have we herein barr'dyour better wisdoms, which have freely gonewith this affair along, (for all, our thanks.)now follows, that you know, young fortinbras,holding a weak supposal of our worth;or thinking by our late dear brother's deathour state to be disjoint and out of frame;colleagued with this dream of his advantage;he hath fail'd not to pester us with message,importing the surrender of those landslost by his father, by all bands of lawto our most valiant brother. so much for him.now for our self, and for this time of meeting:thus much the business is. we have here writto norway, uncle of young fortinbras,who impotent and bedrid, scarcely hearsof this his nephew's purpose, to suppresshis further gate herein; in that the levies,the lists, and full proportions are all madeout of his subjects: and we here dispatchyou, good cornelius, and you voltimand,for bearers of this greeting to old norway;giving to you no further personal powerof treaty with the king, more than the scopewhich these dilated articles allow.farewel, and let your haste commend your duty.
king.: 'tis sweet and commendable in your nature,to give these mourning duties to your father:but you must know, your father lost a father;that father his, and the surviver boundin filial obligation, for some termto do obsequious sorrow. but to perseverein obstinate condolement, is a courseof impious stubbornness, unmanly grief.it shows a will most incorrect to heav'n,a heart unfortify'd, a mind impatient,an understanding simple, and unschool'd:for what we know must be, and is as commonas any the most vulgar thing to sense,why should we, in our peevish opposition,take it to heart? fie! 'tis a fault to heav'n,a fault against the dead, a fault to nature,to reason most absurd, whose common themeis death of fathers, and who still hath cry'd,from the first corse, 'till he that died today,"this must be so." we pray you throw to earththis unprevailing woe, and think of usas of a father: for let the world take note,you are the most immediate to our throne,and with no less nobility of love,than that which dearest father bears his son,do i impart tow'rd you. for your intentin going back to school to wittenberg,it is most retrograde to our desire:and we beseech you, bend you to remainhere in the cheer and comfort of our eye,our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
ham.: i would not hear your enemy say so;nor shall you do mine ear that violence,to make it truster of your own reportagainst yourself. i know you are no truant;but what is your affair in elsinore?we'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
hor.: two nights together had these gentlemen,marcellus and bernardo, on their watch,in the dead waste and middle of the night,been thus encountered. a figure like your father,arm'd at all points exactly, capapie,appears before them, and with solemn marchgoes slow and stately by them; thrice he walk'd,by their opprest and fearsurprized eyes,within his truncheon's length; whilst they (distill'dalmost to jelly with the act of fear)stand dumb, and speak not to him. this to mein dreadful secrecy impart they did,and i with them the third night kept the watch,where as they had deliver'd both in time,form of the thing, each word made true and good,the apparition co
hor.: my lord, i did;but answer made it none; yet once methoughtit lifted up its head, and did addressitself to motion, like as it would speak:but even then the morning cock crew loud;and at the sound it shrunk in haste away,and vanished from our sight.
ham.: if it assume my noble father's person,i'll speak to it, tho' hell itself should gapeand bid me hold my peace. i pray you all,if you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,let it be treble in your silence still:and whatsoever shall befall tonight,give it an understanding, but no tongue;i will requite your loves: so, fare ye well.upon the platform 'twixt eleven and twelvei'll visit you.
ham.: your love, as mine to you: farewell.my father's spirit in arms! all is not well;i doubt some foul play: would the night were come;'till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,(tho' all the earth o'erwhelm them) to mens eyes.
laer.: think it no more:for nature crescent does not grow alone,in thews and bulk; but as his temple waxes,the inward service of the mind and soulgrows wide withal. perhaps he loves you now,and now no soil nor cautel doth besmerchthe virtue of his will: but you must fear,his greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own:for he himself is subject to his birth;he may not, as unvalued persons do,carve for himself; for on his choice dependsthe sanctity and health of the whole state.and therefore must his choice be circumscrib'dunto the voice and yielding of that bodywhereof he's head. then if he says he loves you,it fits your wisdom so far to believe it,as he in his peculiar act and placemay give his saying deed; which is no further,than the main voice of denmark goes withal.then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,if with too credent ear you list his songs,or lose your heart; or your chaste treasure opento his unmaster'd importunity.fear it, ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,and keep within the rear of your affection,out of the shot and danger of desire.the chariest maid is prodigal enough,if she unmask her beauty to the moon:virtue itself scapes not calumnious strokes,the canker galls the infants of the spring,too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,and in the morn and liquid dew of youthcontagious blastments are most imminent.be wary then, best safety lies in fear;youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
oph.: i shall th' effects of this good lesson keep;as watchman to my heart. but good my brother,do not, as some ungracious pastors do,shew me the steep and thorny way to heav'n;whilst like a puff'd and careless libertine,himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,and recks not his own reed.
laer.: oh, fear me not.i stay too long; —— but here my father comes:a double blessing is a double grace;occasion smiles upon a second leave.
pol.: yet here, laertes! get aboard for shame,the wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,and you are staid for there. my blessing with you;and these few precepts in thy memorysee thou character. give thy thoughts no tongue,nor any unproportion’d thought his act:be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar;the friends thou hast, and their adoption try'd,grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel:but do not dull thy palm with entertainmentof each newhatch’d, unfledg’d comrade. bewareof entrance to a quarrel: but being in,bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.give ev'ry man thine ear; but few thy voice.take each man’s censure; but reserve thy judgment.costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,but not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy:for the apparel oft proclaims the man,and they in france of the best rank and stationare most select and generous, chief in that.neither a borrower, nor a lender be;for loan oft loses both it self and friend:a borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.this above all; to thine own self be true;and it must follow, as the night the day,thou canst not then be false to any man.farewell; my blessing season this in thee!
pol.: marry, well bethought!'tis told me he hath very oft of lategiven private time to you; and you yourselfhave of your audience been most free and bounteous;if it be so, as so 'tis put on me,and that in way of caution, i must tell you,you do not understand yourself so clearly;as it behoves my daughter, and your honour.what is between you? give me up the truth.
pol.: ay, springs to catch woodcocks. i do knowwhen the blood burns, how prodigal the soullends the tongue vows. these blazes, oh my daughter,giving more light than heat, extinct in both,ev'n in their promise as it is a making,you must not take for fire. from this time,be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence,set your intreatments at a higher rate,than a command to parley. for lord hamlet,believe so much in him, that he is young;and with a larger tether may he walk,than may be given you. in few, ophelia,do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,not of that die which their investments show,but mere implorers of unholy suits,breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,the better to beguile. this is for all:i would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,have you so slander any moment's leisure,as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet.look to't, i charge you; come your way.
ham.: angels and ministers of grace defend us!be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damn'd,bring with thee airs from heav'n, or blasts from hell,be thy intents wicked or charitable,thou com'st in such a questionable shape,that i will speak to thee. i'll call thee hamlet,king, father, royal dane: oh answer me.these 21 lines following are in the first edition, but in some editions since left out, perhaps as being thought too verbose, but certainly shakespeare's.this heavyheaded revel, east and west,makes us traduc'd, and tax'd of other nations;they clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrasesoil our addition; and indeed it takesfrom our achievements, though perform'd at height,the pith and marrow of our attribute.so oft it chances in particular men,that for some vicious mole of nature in them;as in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,since nature cannot chuse his origin)by the o'ergrowth of some complexion,oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason;or by some habit, that too much o'erleavensthe form of plausive manners; that these mencarrying, i say, the stamp of one defect,(being nature's livery, or fortune's scar)their virtues else, be they as pure as grace,as infinite as man may undergo,shall in the general censure take corruptionfrom that particular fault.let me not burst in ignorance; but tellwhy thy canoniz'd bones hearsed in death,have burst their ceraments? why the sepulcher,wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws,to cast thee up again? what may this mean?that thou dead coarse again in compleat steelrevisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,making night hideous: and us fools of natureso horridly to shake our dispositionwith thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?
ham.: my fate cries out,and makes each petty artery in this bodyas hardy as the nemean lion's nerve:still am i call'd: unhand me, gentlemen——by heav'n i'll make a ghost of him that lets me——i say away——go on——i'll follow thee——
ham.: oh heav'n!
ghost.: i find thee apt;and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weedthat rots itself in ease on lethe's wharf,wouldst thou not stir in this. now, hamlet, hear:'tis given out, that sleeping in my orchard,a serpent stung me. the whole ear of denmarkis by a forged process of my deathrankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,the serpent that did sting thy father's lifenow wears his crown.
queen.: oh hamlet, what a falling off was there!from me, whose love was of that dignity,that it went hand in hand ev'n with the vowi made to her in marriage; and to declineupon a wretch, whose natural gifts were poorto those of mine!but virtue, as it never will be mov'd,though lewdness court it in a shape of heav'n's,so lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,will sate itself in a celestial bed,and prey on garbage ————but soft, methinks i scent the morning air ————brief let me be; sleeping within mine orchard,my custom always in the afternoon,upon my secure hour thy uncle stolewith juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,and in the porches of mine ears did pourthe leperous distilment; whose effectholds such an enmity with blood of man,that swift as quicksilver it courses throughthe natural gates and allies of the body;and with a sudden vigour it doth possetand curd, like eager droppings into milk,the thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine,and a most instant tetter bark'd about,most lazarlike, with vile and loathsome crustall my smooth body.thus was i sleeping, by a brother's hand,of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatch'd;cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,†unhouzled, †unanointed, †unaneled;no reck'ning made, but sent to my accountwith all my imperfections on my head.oh horrible! oh horrible! most horrible!if thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;let not the royal bed of denmark bea couch for luxury and damned incest.but howsoever thou pursu'st this act,taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contriveagainst thy mother ought; leave her to heav'n;and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,to prick and sting her. fare thee well at once!the glowworm shews the matin to be near,and 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.adieu, adieu, adieu; remember me.
ham.: oh all you host of heav'n! o earth! what else?and shall i couple hell? oh hold my heart ——and you my sinews, grow not instant old;but bear me stiffly up; remember thee ——ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seatin this distracted globe: remember thee ————yea, from the table of my memoryi'll wipe away all trivial fond records,all saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,that youth and observation copied there;and thy commandment all alone shall livewithin the book and volume of my brain,unmixt with baser matter. yes, by heav'n:oh most pernicious woman!oh villain, villain, smiling damned villain!my tables, —— meet it is i set it down,that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;at least i'm sure it may be so in denmark.so uncle, there you are; now to my word;it is: adieu, adieu, remember me:i've sworn it —— ——
mar.: so be it.
hor.: illo, ho, ho, my
ham.: and therefore as a stranger give it welcome.there are more things in heav'n and earth, horatio,than are dreamt of in your philosophy. but come,swear as before, never so help you mercy,how strange or odd soe'er i bear my self,(as i perchance hereafter shall think meetto put an antick disposition on)that you at such time seeing me, never shallwith arms encumbered thus, or this head shake,or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,as, well——we know——or, we could, and if we would——or, if we list to speak——or, there be, and it there might——(or such ambiguous giving out) denotethat you know aught of me. this do ye swear,so grace and mercy at your most need help you!swear.
pol.: marry, well said, very well said. look you, sir,enquire me first what daneskers are in paris;and how, and who, what means, and where they keep,what company, at what expense? and findingby this encompassment and drift of question,that they do know my son; come you more near;then your particular demands will touch it,take you, as 'twere some distant knowledge of him,as thus———i know his father and his friends,and in part him———do you mark this, reynoldo?
pol.: and in part him———but you may say———not well;but if't be he i mean, he's very wild;addicted so and so———and there put on himwhat forgeries you please; marry, none so rank,as may dishonour him; take heed of that;but, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips,as are companions noted and most knownto youth and liberty.
pol.: faith no, as you may season it in the charge;you must not put another scandal on him,that he is open to incontinency;that's not my meaning; but breathe his faults soquaintly,that they may seem the taints of liberty;the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,a savageness in unreclaimed blood.of general assault.
pol.: marry, sir, here's my drift,and i believe it is a fetch of wit.you laying these slight sallies on my son,as 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,mark you your party in converse; he you would sound,having ever seen in the prenominate crimes,the youth you speak of guilty, be assur'dhe closes with you in this consequence;good sir, or so, or friend, or gentleman,(according to the phrase or the addition,of man and country.)
pol.: at closes in the consequence —— ay marry,he closes thus. i know the gentleman,i saw him yesterday, or t'other day,or then, with such and such, and as you say,there was he gaming, there o'ertook in's rouse,there falling out at tennis; or perchance,i saw him enter such a house of sale,videlicet, a brothel, or so forth. see you now;your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;and thus do we of wisdom and of reach,with windlaces, and with assays of bias,by indirections find directions out:so by my former lecture and adviceshall you my son; you have me, have you not?
oph.: alas my lord, i have been so affrighted!
pol.: with what, in the name of heav'n?
oph.: he took me by the wrist, and held me hard,then goes he to the length of all his arm;and with his other hand, thus o'er his brow,he falls to such perusal of my face,s he would draw it. long time staid he so;at last, a little shaking of his arm,and thrice his head thus waving up and down.he rais'd a sigh, so piteous and profound,that it did seem to shatter all his bulk,and end his being. then he lets me go,and with his head over his shoulder turn'd,he seem'd to find his way without his eyes,for outadoors he went without their help,and to the last, bended their light on me.
pol.: come, go with me, i will go seek the king:this is the very ecstasy of love,whose violent property foredoes it self,and leads the will to desperate undertakings,as oft as any passion under heav'n,that do's afflict our natures. i am sorry;what, have you giv'n him any hard words of late?
pol.: that hath made him mad.i'm sorry that with better heed and judgmenti had not quoted him. i fear'd he trifl'dand meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy:it seems it is as proper to our age,to cast beyond ourselves in our opinions,as it is common for the younger sortto lack discretion. come, go we to the king,this must be known, which being kept close, might movemore grief to hide, than hate to utter love.
queen.: good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you;and sure i am, two men there are not living,to whom he more adheres. if it will please youto shew us so much gentry and good will,as to extend your time with us a while,for the supply and profit of our hope,your visitation shall receive such thanksas fits a king's remembrance.
pol.: have i, my lord? assure you, my good liege,i hold my duty, as i hold my soul,both to my god, and to my gracious king;and i do think, or else this brain of minehunts not the trail of policy so sureas i have used to do, that i have foundthe very cause of hamlet's lunacy.
king.: thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.he tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath foundthe head and source of all your son's distemper.
volt.: most fair return of greetings, and desires.upon our first, he sent out to suppresshis nephew's levies, which to him appear'dto be a preparation 'gainst the polack:but better look't into, he truly foundit was against your highness. whereat griev'd,that so his sickness, age, and impotencewas falsely borne in hand, sends out arrestson fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,receives rebuke from norway; and in fine,makes vow before his uncle never moreto give th' assay of arms against your majesty.whereon old norway, overcome with joy,gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,and his commission to employ those soldiers,so levied as before, against the polack:with an entreaty herein further shewn,that it might please you to give quiet passthrough your dominions for this enterprizeon such regards of safety and allowance,as herein are set down.
pol.: this business is well ended.my liege and madam, to expostulatewhat majesty should be, what duty is,why day is day, night night, and time is time,were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.therefore, since brevity's the soul of wit,and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,i will be brief: your noble son is mad.mad call i it; for to define true madness,what is't, but to be nothing else but mad?
pol.: madam, i swear i use no art at all;that he is mad 'tis true; 'tis true, 'tis pity;and pity, it is true; a foolish figure,but farewell it; for i will use no art.mad let us grant him then; and now remainsthat we find out the cause of this effect,or rather say, the cause of this defect,for this effect defective, comes by cause,thus it remains, and the remainder thus— perpend:i have a daughter; have, whilst she is mine,who in her duty and obedience, mark,hath given me this; now gather, and surmise.to the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified ophelia.—that's an ill phrase, a vile phrase, beautified is a vile phrase; but you shall hear—these to her excellent white bosom, these—
pol.: good madam stay a while, i will be faithful.doubt thou, the stars are fire,doubt, that the sun doth move;doubt truth to be a liar,but never doubt, i love.oh dear ophelia, i am ill at these numbers; i have not art to reckon my groans; but that i love thee best, oh most best, believe it. adieu.thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, hamlet.this in obedience hath my daughter shown me:and more above, hath his solicitings,as they fell out by time, by means, and place,all given to mine ear.
pol.: i would fain prove so. but what might you think;when i had seen his hot love on the wing,(as i perceived it, i must tell you that,before my daughter told me,) what might you,or my dear majesty your queen here, think?if i had play'd the desk or tablebook,or given my heart working, mute and dumb,or look'd upon this love with idle sight,what might you think? no, i went round to work;and my young mistress thus i did bespeak;lord hamlet is a prince out of thy sphere,this must not be; and then, i precepts gave her,that she should lock her self from his resort,admit no messengers, receive no tokens:which done, she took the fruits of my advice,and he repulsed, a short tale to make,fell to a sadness, then into a fast,thence to a watching, thence into a weakness,thence to a lightness, and by this declensioninto the madness wherein now he raves,and all we wail
pol.: at such a time i'll loose my daughter to him,be you and i behind an arras then,mark the encounter: if he love her not,and be not from his reason fal'n thereon,let me be no assistant for a state,but keep a farm and carters.
pol.: how say you by that? still harping on mydaughter–––yet he knew me not at first; he said i was a fishmonger.he is far gone; and truly in my youth,i suffered much extremity for love;very near this. i’ll speak to him again.what do you read, my lord?
ham.: that you must teach me; but let me conjureyou by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancyof our youth, by the obligation of our everpreservedlove, and by what more dear, a better proposercould charge you withal; be even and direct with me,whether you were sent for or no?
ham.: i will tell you why; so shall my anticipationprevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the kingand queen moult no feather. i have of late, butwherefore i know not, lost all my mirth, forgone allcustom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so heavilywith my disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth,seems to me a steril promontory; this most excellentcanopy the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament,this majestical roof fretted with golden fire,why, it appears no other thing to me, than a foul andpestilent congregation of vapours. what a piece ofwork is man! how noble in reason! how infinite infaculties! in form and moving how express and admirable!in action how like an angel! in apprehensionhow like a god! the beauty of the world, the paragonof animals! and yet to me, what is this quintessenceof dust? man delights not me; nor woman neither,though by your smiling you seem to say so.
ham.: he that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foyle and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall end his part in peace; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for't. what players are they?
ham.: what, are they children? who maintains 'em? how are they escorted? will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means are no better:) their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession?
ham.: it is not strange; for mine uncle is king ofdenmark, and those that would make mowes at himwhile my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, anhundred ducats apiece, for his picture in little. thereis something in this more than natural, if philosophycould find it out.
ham.: gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore;your hands: come then, the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. let me comply withyou in this garbe, lest my extent to the players(which i tell you must shew fairly outward) shouldmore appear like entertainment than yours. you arewelcome; but my unclefather and auntmother aredeceiv'd.
pol.: the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoralcomical, historical pastoral, scene unividable, or poem unliminted,seneca cannot be too heavy, nor plautus too light,for the law of wit, and the liberty. these are theonly men.
ham.: why as by lot, god, wot––––and then youknow, it came to pas, as most like it was; the first row of the rubrick will shew you more. for lookwhere my abridgements come.y’are welcome masters, welcome
ham.: i heard thee speak me a speech once, but itwas never acted: or if it was, not above once, forthe play i remember pleas'd not the million, 'twascaviar to the general; but it was, (as i receiv'd it,and others, whose judgment in such matters cried inthe top of mine) an excellent play; well digested inthe scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning.i remember one said, there was no salt inthe lines, to make the matter savoury; nor no matterin the phrase, that might indict the author ofaffection; but call'd it, an honest method. onespeech in it i chiefly lov'd, 'twas æneas' tale to dido,and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks ofpriam's laughter. if it live in your memory, beginat this line, let me see, let me see —— the ruggedpyrrhus, like th' hyrcanian beast. it is not so —— itbegins with pyrrhus.the rugged pyrrhus, he whose sable armsblack as his purpose, did the night resemblewhen he lay couched in the ominous horse;hath now his dread and black complexion smear'dwith heraldry more dismal; head to footnow is he total gules; horridly tricktwith blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,bak'd and impaled with the parching fires,that lend a tyrannous and damned lightto murders vile. roasted in wrath and fire,and thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,with eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhusold grandsire priam seeks.
play.: run barefoot up and down, threatening theflameswith bisson rheum; a clout upon that head,where late the diadem stood, and for a robeabout her lank and all o'erteemed loyns,a blanket in th' alarm of fear caught up.who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd,'gainst fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd:but if the gods themselves did see her then,when she saw pyrrhus make malicious sportin mincing with his sword her husband's limbs;the instant burst of clamour that she made,(unless things mortal move them not at all)would have made melt the burning eyes of heav'n,and passion in the gods.
ham.: ay so, god b' w' ye: now i am alone.oh what a rogue and peasant slave am i?is it not monstrous that this player here,but in a fiction, in a dream of passion,could force his soul so to his own conceit,that from her working, all his visage warm'd:tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,a broken voice, and his whole function suitingwith forms, to his conceit? and all for nothing?for hecuba?what's hecuba to him, or he to hecuba,that he should weep for her? what would he do,had he the motive and the cue for passionthat i have? he would drown the stage with tears,and cleave the gen'ral ear with horrid speech,make mad the guilty, and appall the free,confound the ignorant, and amaze indeedthe very faculty of eyes and ears. ———yet i say nothing; no, not for a king,upon whose property and most dear lifea damn'd defeat was made. am i a coward?who calls me villain, breaks my pate across,plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face?tweaks me by th' nose, gives me the lie i' th' throat,as deep as to the lungs? who does me this?yet i should take it ——— for it cannot be,but i am pigeonliver'd, and lack gallto make oppression bitter; or ere this,i should have fatted all the region kiteswith this slave's offal. bloody, bawdy villain!remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!why what an ass am i? this is most brave,that i, the son of a dear father murdered,prompted to my revenge by heav'n and hell,must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,and fall a cursing like a very drab ——a scullion!^k —— fye upon't! foh! —— about mybrain! ——i've heard, that guilty creatures, at a play,have by the very cunning of the scenebeen struck so to the soul, that presentlythey have proclaim'd their malefactions.for murder, though it have no tongue, will speakwith most miraculous organ. i'll have these players,play something like the murther of my father,before mine uncle. i'll observe his looks,i'll tent him to the quick; if he but blench,i know my course. the spirit that i have seenmay be the devil, and the devil hath powerto assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhapsout of my weakness and my melancholy,(as he is very potent with such spirits)abuses me to damn me. i'll have groundsmore relative than this: the play's the thing,wherein i'll catch the conscience of the
king.: and can you by no drift of a conferenceget from him why he puts on this confusion,grating so harshly all his days of quiet,with turbulent and dang'rous lunacy?
ros.: he does confess he feels himself distracted;but from what cause he will by no means speak.
guil.: nor do we find him forward to be sounded;but with a crafty madness keeps aloof,when we would bring him on to some confessionof his true state.
king.: sweet gertrude, leave us too,for we have closely sent for hamlet hither,that he, as 'twere by accident, may hereaffront ophelia. her father, and my self,will so bestow ourselves, that seeing unseenwe may of their encounter frankly judge,and gather by him, as he is behaved,if't be th' afflictions of his love, or no,that thus he suffers
king.: oh 'tis too true.how smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!the harlot's cheek beautied with plastering artis not more ugly to the thing that helps it,than is my deed to my most painted word.oh heavy burthen!
ham.: to be, or not to be? that is the question—whether 'tis nobler in the mind, to sufferthe slings and arrows of outrageous fortune;or to take arms against a sea of troubles,and by opposing end them?—to die,—to sleep—no more; and by a sleep to say we endthe heartache and the thousand natural shocksthat flesh is heir to; 'tis a consummationdevoutly to be wish'd. to die—to sleep—to sleep: perchance to dream; ay, there's the rub—for in that sleep of death what dreams may come,when we have shuffled off this mortal coil,must give us pause. there's the respectthat makes calamity of so long life.for who would bear the whips and scorns of time,th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,the pang of despis'd love, the law’s delay,the insolence of office, and the spurnsthat patient merit of th' unworthy takes;when he himself might his quietus makewith a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,to groan and sweat under a weary life?but that the dread of something after death,(that undiscover'd country, from whose bourneno traveller returns) puzzles the will,and makes us rather bear those ills we have,than fly to others that we know not of.thus conscience does make cowards of us all;and thus the native hue of resolutionis sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought;and enterprizes of great pith and moment,with this regard, their currents turn awryand lose the name of action. — soft you now,the fair ophelia? nymph, in thy oraisonsbe all my sins remembered.
ham.: get thee to a nunnery. why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? i am myself indifferent honest, but yet i could accuse me of such things, that it were better my mother had not born me.i am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offencesat my beck, than i have thoughts to put them in,imagination to give them shape, or time to act them.what should such fellows as i do crawling between heav'n and earth? we are arrant knaves, believe none of us—go thy ways to a nunnery—where's your father?
king.: it shall be so:madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.
ham.: speak the speech i pray you, as i pronounc'd it to you, trippingly on the tongue.but if you mouth it, as many of our players do, ihad as lieve the towncrier had spoke my lines. anddo not saw the air too much with your hand thus,but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest,and, as i may say, whirlwind of your passion, youmust acquire and beget a temperance that may give itsmoothness. oh, it offends me to the soul, to heara robustious periwigpated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings: who (for the most part) are capable of nothing, but inexplicable dumb shows, and noise: icould have such a fellow whipt for o'erdoing termagant; it outherods herod. pray you avoid it.
ham.: oh reform it altogether. and let those thatplay your clowns, speak no more than is set downfor them: for there be of them that will themselveslaugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectatorsto laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary question of the play be then to be considered:that's villanous, and shews a most pitiful ambitionin the fool that uses it. go make you ready.how now, my lord? will the king hear this piece ofwork?
ham.: no, nor mine— now, my lord, you plaidonce i'th' university, you say?
ham.: it was a brute part of him, to kill so capital a calf there. be the players ready?ro. ay, my lord, they stay upon your patience.
king.: i do believe you think what now you speak;but what we do determine, oft we break:purpose is but the slave to memory,of violent birth, but poor validity;which now, like fruits unripe, sticks on the tree,but fall unshaken, when they mellow be.most necessary 'tis that we forget,to pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt:what to our selves in passion we propose,the passion ending, doth the purpose lose;the violence of either grief or joy,their own enactors with themselves destroy:where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;grief joys, joy grieves on slender accident.this world is not for aye, and 'tis not strangethat even our loves should with our fortunes change;for 'tis a question left us yet to prove,whether love fortune lead, or fortune love.the great man down, you mark his fav'rite flies;the poor, advanc'd, makes friends of enemies:and hitherto doth love on fortune tend,for who not needs, shall never lack a friend;and who in want a hollow friend doth try,directly seasons him his enemy.but orderly to end where i begun,our wills and fates do so contrary run,that our devices still are overthrown,our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.so think thou wilt no second husband wed,but die thy thoughts, when thy first lord is dead.
ham.: the mousetrap. marry, how? tropically.this play is the image of a murther done in vienna;gonzago is the duke's name, his wife baptista; youshall see anon, 'tis a knavish piece of work; but whato' that? your majesty, and we that have free souls,it touches us not; let the galled jade wince; our withersare unwrung.this is one lucianus, nephew to the duke.
ham.: so you must take your husbands.begin murtherer. leave thy damnable faces, and begin.come, the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.luc. thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, andtime agreeing;confederate season, else no creature seeing;thou mixture rank, of midnightweeds collected,with hecate's bane, thrice blasted, thrice infected,thy natural magic, and dire property,on wholesome life usurp immediately.
ham.: why look you now, how unworthy a thingyou make of me; you would play upon me, youwould seem to know my stops; you would pluck outthe heart of my mystery; you would sound me frommy lowest note, to the top of my compass; and thereis much musick, excellent voice, in this little organ,yet cannot you make it speak. why do you think thati am easier to be played on than a pipe? call me whatinstrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannotplay upon me. god bless you, sir.
ham.: then will i come to my mother by and by—they fool me to the top of my bent;— i will comeby and by.
pol.: i will say so.
ham.: by and by is casily said. leave, me friends. 'tis now the very witching time of night,when churchyards yawn, and hell itself breaths outcontagion to this world. now could i drink hotblood,and do such bitter business as the daywould quake to look on. soft, now to my mother—oh heart, lose not thy nature; let not everthe soul of nero enter this firm bosom;let me be cruel, not unnatural;i will speak daggers to her, but use none.my tongue and soul in this be hypocrites!
king.: i like him not, nor stands it safe with usto let his madness rage. therefore prepare you;i your commission will forthwith dispatch,and he to england shall along with you.the terms of our estate may not endurehazard so near us, as doth hourly growout of his lunacies.guild. we will provide our selves;most holy and religious fear, it is,to keep those many bodies safe, that liveand feed upon your majesty.
pol.: my lord, he's going to his mother's closet;behind the arras i'll convey my selfto hear the process. i'll warrant she'll tax him home.and as you said, and wisely was it said,'tis meet that some more audience than a mother,(since nature makes them partial,) should o'erhearthe speech of vantage. fare you well my liege,i'll call upon you ere you go to bed,and tell you what i know.
lord.: oh my offence is rank, it smells to heav'n,it hath the primal eldest curse upon't;a brother's murther. pray i cannot,though inclination be as sharp as will:my stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,and like a man to double business bound;i stand in pause where i shall first begin,and both neglect. what if this cursèd handwere thicker than it self with brother's blood?is there not rain enough in the sweet heav'nsto wash it white as snow? whereto serves mercy,but to confront the visage of offence!and what’s in prayer, but this twofold force,to be forestalled ere we come to fall,or pardon’d being down? then i'll look up.my fault is past. but oh what form of prayercan serve my turn; forgive me my foul murther!that cannot be, since i am still possestof those effects for which i did the murther,my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen,may one be pardon’d, and retain th’ offence?in the corrupted currents of this world,offence’s gilded hand may shove by justice;and oft ’tis seen, the wicked prize it selfbuys out the law; but 'tis not so above:there is no shuffling, there the action liesin his true nature, we our selves compell’dev'n to the teeth and forehead of our faults,to give in evidence.’ what then? what rests?try what repentance can. what can it not?yet what can it, when one cannot repent?oh wretched state! oh bosom, black as death!oh limed soul, that struggling to be freeart more engag’d! help angels, make assay!bow stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel!be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!all may be well.
ham.: now might i do it pat, now he is praying,and now i’ll do’t.and so he goes to heav’n,and so am i reveng’d? that would be scann’d,—a villain kills my father, and for thati, his sole son, do this same villain sendto heav’n—o this is hire and salary, not revenge.he took my father grossly, full of bread,with all his crimes broad blown; as fresh as may;and how his audit stands, who knows, save heav’n?but in our circumstance and course of thought,'tis heavy with him. am i then reveng'd,to take him in the purging of his soul,when he is fit and season'd for his passage?up sword, and know thou a more horrid time:when he is drunk, asleep, or in his rage;or in th' infectious pleasure of his bed,at gaming, swearing, or about some actthat has no relish of salvation in't,then trip him, that his heels may kick at heav'n,and that his soul may be as damn'd and blackas hell, whereto it goes. my mother stays;this physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
ham.: ay, lady, 'twas my word.thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.i took thee for thy better; take thy fortune;thou find'st, to be too busy, is some danger.leave wringing of your hands, peace, sit you down,and let me wring your heart, for so i shallif it be made of penetrable stuff;if damned custom have not braz'd it so,that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
ham.: such an act,that blurs the grace and blush of modesty;calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rosefrom the fair forehead of an innocent love,and sets a blister there; makes marriagevows.as false as dicers oaths. oh such a deed,as from the body of contraction plucksthe very soul, and sweet religion makesa rhapsody of words. heav'n's face doth glowo'er this solidity and compound mass,with tristful visage as against the doom.'tis thoughtsick at the act.
ham.: look here upon this picture, and on this,the counterfeit presentment of two brothers:see what a grace was seated on this brow,hyperion’s curls, the front of jove himself,an eye like mars, to threaten or command,a station like the herald mercury:newlighted on a heav'nkissing hill;a combination, and a form indeed,where every god did seem to set his seal,to give the world assurance of a man.this was your husband. —— look you now what follows,here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear,blasting his wholesome brother. have you eyes?could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,and batten on this moore? ha! have you eyes?you cannot call it love; for at your age,the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,and waits upon the judgment; and what judgmentwould step from this to this? what devil was't,that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman blind? .o shame! where is thy blush? rebellious hell,if thou canst mutiny in a matron's bones,to flaming youth let virtue be as wax,and melt in her own fire. proclaim no shame,when the compulsive ardour gives the charge,since frost it self as actively doth burn,and reason a pardons will.
ghost.: do not forget: this visitationis but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.but look! amazement on thy mother sits;o step between her and her fighting soul;conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.speak to her, hamlet.
ham.: what ecstasie?my pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,and makes as healthful musick. 'tis not madnessthat i have utter'd; bring me to the testand i the matter will reword; which madnesswould gambol from. mother, for love of grace,lay not that flattering unction to your soul,that not your trespass, but my madness speaks;it will but skin and film the ulcerous place,whilst rank corruption, running all within,infects unseen. confess your self to heav'n,repent what's past; avoid what is to come,and do not spread the compost on the weedsto make them ranker. forgive this my virtue;for in the fatness of these pursie times,virtue it self of vice must pardon beg,yea, 't courb, and woe, for leave to do it good.
ham.: o throw away the worser part of it,and live the purer with the other half.good night; but go not to mine uncle's bed;assume a virtue, if you have it not.that monster custom, who all sense doth eat,of habit's devil, is angel yet in this;that to the use of actions fair and goodhe likewise gives a frock or liverythat aptly is put on. refrain tonight,and that shall lend a kind of easinessto the next abstinence, the next more easy;for use can almost change the stamp of nature,and master ev'n the devil, or throw him outwith wondrous potency. once more, good night:and when you are desirous to be blest,i'll blessing beg of you. for this same lord,i do repent: but heav'n hath pleas'd it so,to punish me with this, and this with me,that i must be their scourge and minister.i will bestow him, and will answer wellthe death i gave him. so again, good night.i must be cruel, only to be kind,thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
ham.: not this by no means that i bid you do;let the fond king tempt you again to bed;pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,and let him for a pair of reechy kisses,or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,make you to ravel all this matter out,that i essentially am not in madness,but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know:for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,would from a paddock, from a bat, a gibbe,such dear concernings hide? who would do so?no, in despight of sense and secrecy,unpeg the basket on the house's top,let the birds fly, and like the famous apeto try conclusions, in the basket creep,and break your own neck down.
ham.: there's letters seal'd, and my two schoolfellows,(whom i will trust as i will adders fang'd,)they bear the mandate; they must sweep my wayand marshal me to knavery: let it work;for 'tis the sport to have the engineerhoist with his own petar: an't shall go hardbut i will delve one yard below their mines,and blow them at moon. o 'tis most sweetwhen in one line two crafts directly meet!this man shall set me packing;i'll lug the guts into the neighbour room;mother, good night. indeed this counselloris now most still, most secret, and most grave,who was in life a foolish prating knave.come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.good night, mother.
king.: o heavy deed!it had been so with us, had we been there:his liberty is full of threats to all;to you yourself, to us, to every one.alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?it will be laid to us, whose providenceshould have kept short, restrain'd, and out of hauntthis mad young man. but so much was our love,we would not understand what was most fit;but like the owner of a foul disease,to keep it from divulging, let it feede'er on the pith of life... where is he gone?
king.: oh gertrude, come away.the sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,but we will ship him hence; and this vile deedwe must, with all our majesty and skill,both countenance, and excuse. ho! guildenstern!friends both, go join you with some further aid:hamlet in madness hath polonius slain,and from his mother's closet hath he drag'd him.go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the bodyinto the chapel. pray you haste in this.come, gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends,and let them know both what we mean to do,and what's untimely done. oh come away,my soul is full of discord and dismay.
ros.: without, my lord, guarded to know yourpleasure.284  hamlet, prince of denmark.
ham.: not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certain convocation of politicque worms are at him, your worm is your only emperor for diet. we fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat our selves for maggots. your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service, two dishes to one table, that's the end.
ham.: two thousand souls, and twenty thousand ducatswill not debate the question of this straw;this is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,that inward breaks, and shews no cause withoutwhy the man dies. i humbly thank you, sir.
ham.: i'll be with you, go a little before.manet hamlet.how all occasions do inform against me,and spur my dull revenge! what is a man,if his chief good and market of his timebe but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.sure he that made us with such large discourse,looking before and after, gave us notthat capability and godlike reasonto rust in us unus'd. now whether it bebestial oblivion, or some craven scrupleof thinking too precisely on th' event,(a thought which quarter'd hath but one part wisdom,and ever three parts coward:) i do not knowwhy yet i live to say this thing's to do,sith i have cause, and will, and strength, and meansto do't. examples gross as earth exhort me;witness this army of such mass and charge,led by a delicate and tender prince,whose spirit with divine ambition puffmakes mouths at the invisible event,exposing what is mortal and unsureto all that fortune, death, and danger dare,ev'n for an eggshell. 'tis not to be great,never to stir without great argument,but greatly to find quarrel in a straw,when honour's at the stake. how stand i then,that have a father kill'd, a mother stain'd,(excitements of my reason and my blood)and let all sleep; while to my shame i seethe imminent death of twenty thousand men,that for a fantasie and trick of famego to their graves like beds, fight for a spotwhereon the numbers cannot try the cause,which is not tomb enough and continentto hide the slain? o then from this time forth,my thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth.
gent.: she speaks much of her father; says she hearsthere's tricks i'th world, and hems, and beats her heart,spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubtthat carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,yet the unshaped use of it doth movethe hearers to collection; they aim at it,and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,which as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them,indeed would make one think there might be thought;though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
oph.: indeed? without an oath, i'll make an end on't:by gis, and by s. charity;alack, and fie for shame,young men will do't, if they come to't;by cock they are to blame.quoth she, before you tumbled me,you promis'd me to wed:so would i ha' done, by yonder sun,and thou hadst not come to my bed.
oph.: i hope all will be well. we must be patient,but i cannot chuse but weep, to think they should layhim i'th' cold ground; my brother shall know of it,and so i thank you for your good counsel. come,my coach; goodnight, ladies; goodnight, sweet ladies; goodnight, goodnight.
king.: follow her close, give her good watch, ipray you;this is the poison of deep grief, it springsall from her father's death. o gertrude, gertrude!when sorrows come, they come not single spies,but in battalions. first, her father slain,next you son gone, and he most violent authorof his own just remove, the people muddied,thick and unwholsome in their thoughts and whispers,for good polonius' death. we've done but greenly,in private to inter him; poor opheliadivided from her self, and her fair judgment,(without the which we're pictures, or mere beasts;)last, and as much containing as all these,her brother is in secret come from france,feeds on this wonder, keeps himself in clouds,and wants not buzzers to infect his earwith pestilent speeches of his father's death;wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,will nothing stick our persons to arraignin ear and ear. o my dear gertrude, this,like to a murdering piece in many places,gives me superfluous death!
king.: what is the cause, laertes,that thy rebellion looks so giantlike?let him go, gertrude; do not fear our person:there's such divinity doth hedge a kingthat treason can but peep to what it would,acts little of its will. tell me, laertes,why are you thus incensed? let him go, gertrude.speak man.
laer.: how came he dead? i'll not be juggled with,to hell, allegiance! vows, to the black devil!conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit;i dare damnation; to this point i stand,that both the worlds i give to negligence,let come what comes; only i'll be reveng'dmost throughly for my father.
king.: why now you speaklike a good child, and a true gentleman.that i am guiltless of your father's death,and am most sensibly in grief for it,it shall as level to your judgment pierce,as day does to your eye.
laer.: let her come in. how now? what noise is that?o heat dry up my brains, tears seven times saltburn out the sense and virtue of mine eye.by heav'n, thy madness shall be paid with weight,till our scale turn the beam. o rose of may!dear maid, kind sister, sweet ophelia!o heavens, is't possible a young maid's witsshould be as mortal as an old man's life?nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,it sends some precious instance of it selfafter the thing it loves.
laer.: let this be so.his means of death, his obscure funeral,no trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,no noble rite, nor formal ostentation,cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,that i must call in question.
king.: two special reasons,which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew'd,and yet to me are strong. the queen, his mother,lives almost by his looks; and for my self,my virtue or my plague, be't either which,she's so conjunctive to my life and soul;that as the star moves not but in his sphere,i could not but by her. the other motive,why to a publick count i might not go,is the great love the general gender bear him;who dipping all his faults in their affection,would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,convert his gyves to graces. so my arrowstoo slightly timbered for so loud a wind,would have reverted to my bow again,and not where i had aim'd them.
king.: to thine own peace: if he be now return'd,as liking not his voyage, and that he meansno more to undertake it; i will work himto an exploit now ripe in my device,under the which he shall not choose, but f
all.: and for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,but ev'n his mother shall uncharge the practice,and call it accident.
king.: a very feather in the cap of youth,yet needful too, for youth no less becomesthe light and careless livery that it wears,than settled age his sables, and his weeds,importing health and graveness. two months sincehere was a gentleman of normandy;i've seen myself and serv'd against the french,and they can well on horseback; but this gallanthad witchcraft in't; he grew unto his seat;and to such wondrous doing brought his horse,as he had been incorps'd and demynatur'dwith the brave beast so far he past my thought,that i in forgery of shapes and tricks,come short of what he did.
king.: he made confession of you;and gave you such a masterly report,for art and exercise in your defence;and for your rapier most especial,that he cry'd out, 'twould be a sight indeed.if one could match you. this report of hisdid hamlet so envenom with his envy,that he could nothing do, but wish and begyour sudden coming o'er to play with him.now out of this——.
king.: let's farther think of this,weigh what convenience both of time and meansmay fit us to our shape. if this should fail,and that our drift look through our bad performance,'twere better not assay'd; therefore this projectshould have a back, or second, that might hold,if this should blast in proof. soft—let me see—we'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings,i ha't—when in your motion you are hot,and make your bouts more violent to th' end,and that he calls for drink; i'll have prepar'd hima chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,if he by chance escape your venom'd tuck,our purpose may hold there. how now, sweet queen?
queen.: there is a willow grows aslant a brook,that shews his hoar leaves in the glassie stream:there with fantastick garlands did he come,of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purplesthat liberal shepherds give a grosser name,but our cold maids do dead mens fingers call them.there on the pendant boughs, her coronet weedsclamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke;when down her weedy trophies and her selffell in the weeping brook; her cloaths spread wide,and mermaidlike, awhile they bore her up;which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,as one incapable of her own distress,or like a creature native, and induedunto that element: but long it could not be,'till that her garments, heavy with their drink,pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious layto muddy death.
1 clown.: it must be se offendendo; it cannot be else:for here lyes the point; if i drown myself wittingly,it argues an act; and an act hath three branches.it is to act, to do, and to perform: argal, she drown'dher self wittingly.
1 clown.: i like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows well; but how does it well? it does well to those that do ill: now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church; argal, the gallows may do well to thee. to't again, come.
ham.: 'tis e'en so; the hand of little employmenthath the daintier sense.clown sings.but age with his stealing steps,hath claw'd me in his clutch:and hath shipped me into the land,as if i ne'er had been such.
ham.: why e'en so: and now my lady worm's, chopless,and knockt about the mazzard with a sexton's spade.here's a fine revolution, if we had the trick to see't.did these bones cost no more the breeding,but to play at loggers with 'em? mine ake to think on't.clown sings.a pickaxe and a spade, a spade:for and, a shrouding sheet!o, a pit of clay, for to be madefor such a guest is meet.
ham.: how absolute the knave is? we must speak bythe card, or equivocation will follow us. by the lord,horatio, these three years i have taken note of it; theage is grown so picked, that the toe of the peasantcomes so near the heel of our courtier, he galls hiskibe. how long hast thou been a gravemaker?
clown.: why sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade,that he will keep out water a great while. and yourwater is a sore decayer of your whorson dead body.here's a scull now has lain in the earth three andtwenty years.
ham.: alas poor yorick! i knew him, horatio, a fellowof infinite jest; of most excellent fancy: he hathborn me on his back a thousand times: and now howabhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rises atit. here hung those lips that i have kissed i knownot how oft. where be your gibes now? your gambols?your songs? your flashes of merriment thatwere wont to set the table in a roar? not onenow, to mock your own grinning? quite chopfallen!now get you to my lady's chamber, and tell her, lether paint an inch thick, to this favour she must come;make her laugh at that———pr'ythee, horatio, tell meone thing.
king.: the queen, the courtiers. what is that they followand with such maimed rites? this doth betoken,the coarse they follow did with desperate handforedo its own life; 'twas of some estate.couch we a while, and mark.
priest.: her obsequies have been as far enlarg'das we have warranty: her death was doubtful,and but that great command o'erways the order,she should in ground unsanctified have logg'd'till the last trump. for charitable prayers,shards, flints, and pebbles, should be thrown on her;yet here she is allow'd her virgin rites,her maiden strewments, and the bringing homeof bell and burial.
king.: this is mere madness;and thus a while the fit will work on him:and thus a while as the female dove,anon as patient as the teplets are disclosed,when that her golden couplets are disclosed,his silence will sit drooping.
ham.: up from my cabin,my seagown scarf about me, in the darkgrop'd i to find out them; had my desire,finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrewto mine own room again, making so bold(my fears forgetting manners) to unsealtheir grand commission, where i found, horatio,a royal knavery; an exact command,larded with many several sorts of reasons,importing denmark's health, and england's too,(with ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,)that on the supervise, no leisure bated,no not to stay the grinding of the ax,my head should be struck off.
play.: i sate me down,devis'd a new commission, wrote it fair:( i once did hold it as our statists do,a baseness to write fair; and labour'd muchhow to forget that learning; but, sir, nowit did me yeoman's service; ) wilt thou knowth' effect of what i wrote?
ham.: why ev'n in that was heaven ord'nant;i had my father's signet in my purse,which was the model of that danish seal:i folded the writ up in form of th' other,subscrib'd it, gave th' impression, plac'd it safely;the change was never known: now, the next daywas our seafight, and what to this was sequent,thou know'st already.
hor.: so, guildenstern and rosencrantz go to't.
ham.: they are not near my conscience; their defeatdoth by their own insinuation grow:'tis dangerous when baser nature comesbetween the pass, and fell incensed pointsof mighty opposites.
ham.: it will be short.the interim's mine, and a man's life's no morethan to say, one.but i am very sorry, good horatio,that to laertes i forgot my self;for by the image of my cause i seethe pourtraiture of his; i'll court his favoursbut sure the bravery of his grief did put meinto a towing passion.
ham.: how if i answer no?
osr.: i mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in tryal.
ham.: he did so with his dug before he suck'd it:thus has he (and many more of the same a breed thati know the drossy age dotes on) only got the tune ofthe time, and outward habit of encounter, a kind ofnesty collection, which carries them through andthrough the most fond and winnowed opinions; anddo but blow them to their tryals, the bubbles are out.
lord.: my lord, his majesty commended him to youby young osrick, who brings back to him, that youattend him in the hall; he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with laertes, or that you will takelonger time?
ham.: give me your pardon, sir, i've done youwrong,but pardon't, as you are a gentleman.this presence knows, and you must needs have heardhow i am punished with sore distraction.what i have donethat might your nature, honour and exceptionroughly awake, i here proclaim was madness:was't hamlet wrong'd laertes? never hamlet.if hamlet from himself be ta'en away,and when he's not himself, does wrong laertes,then hamlet do's it not; hamlet denies it:who does it then? his madness. if't be so,hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd,his madness is poor hamlet's enemy.let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil,free me so far in your most generous thoughts,that i have shot mine arrow o'er the house,and hurt my brother.
laer.: i am satisfied in nature,whose motive, in this case, should stir me mostto my revenge: but in my terms of honouri stand aloof, and will no reconcilement;'till by some elder matters of known honouri have a voice, and president of peaceto keep my name ungor'd. but till that time,i do receive your off'r'd love like love,and will not wrong it.
ham.: one ————
laer.: a hit, a very palpable hit.osric. well —— again ————
laer.: say you so? come on.osric. nothing neither way.
ham.: nay, come again ————osric. look to the queen there, ho!
amb.: the fight is dismal,and our affairs from england come too late:the ears are senseless that should give us hearing;to tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd,that rosincrosse and guildenstern are dead:where should we have our thanks?
hor.: not from his mouth,had it th' ability of life to thank you:he never gave command'ment for their death.but since so full upon this bloody question,you from the polack wars, and you from england,are here arriv'd; give order that these bodieshigh on a stage be placed to the view,and let me speak to th' yet unknowing world,how these things came about. so shall you hearof cruel, bloody, and unnatural acts,of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,of deaths put on by cunning, and forc'd cause,and in this upshot, purposes mistook,fall'n on th' inventors heads. all this can itruly deliver.
hor.: of that i shall have also cause to speak,and from his mouth whose voice will draw no more:but let this same be presently perform'd,even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischanceon plots and errors happen.
fort.: let four captainsbear hamlet like a soldier to the stage;for he was likely, had he been put on,to have prov'd most royally. and for his passage,the soldiers musick, and the rites of warspeak loudly for him—take up the body: such a sight as thisbecomes the field, but here shews much amiss.go, bid the soldiers shoot.
